PART FIVE: MUTUAL TRUST

                            CHAPTER

Key Management
and Distribution

          14.1 Symmetric Key Distribution Using Symmetric Encryption
                          A Key Distribution Scenario
                          Hierarchical Key Control
                          Session Key Lifetime
                          A Transparent Key Control Scheme
                          Decentralized Key Control
                          Controlling Key Usage

          14.2 Symmetric Key Distribution Using Asymmetric Encryption
                          Simple Secret Key Distribution
                          Secret Key Distribution with Confidentiality and Authentication
                          A Hybrid Scheme

          14.3 Distribution of Public Keys
                          Public Announcement of Public Keys
                          Publicly Available Directory
                          Public-Key Authority
                          Public-Key Certificates

          14.4 X.509 Certificates
                          Certificates
                          X.509 Version 3

          14.5 Public-Key Infrastructure
                          PKIX Management Functions
                          PKIX Management Protocols

          14.6 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                                                                               441
           442 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES

                          After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
                           Discuss the concept of a key hierarchy.
                           Understand the issues involved in using asymmetric encryption to distribute

                               symmetric keys.
                           Present an overview of approaches to public-key distribution and analyze

                               the risks involved in various approaches.
                           List and explain the elements in an X.509 certificate.
                           Present an overview of public-key infrastructure concepts.

                         The topics of cryptographic key management and cryptographic key distribution are
                         complex, involving cryptographic, protocol, and management considerations. The pur-
                         pose of this chapter is to give the reader a feel for the issues involved and a broad sur-
                         vey of the various aspects of key management and distribution. For more information,
                         the place to start is the three-volume NIST SP 800-57, followed by the recommended
                         readings listed at the end of this chapter.

             14.1 SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING
                   SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION

                         For symmetric encryption to work, the two parties to an exchange must share the
                         same key, and that key must be protected from access by others. Furthermore, fre-
                         quent key changes are usually desirable to limit the amount of data compromised
                         if an attacker learns the key. Therefore, the strength of any cryptographic system
                         rests with the key distribution technique, a term that refers to the means of delivering
                         a key to two parties who wish to exchange data without allowing others to see the
                         key. For two parties A and B, key distribution can be achieved in a number of ways,
                         as follows:

                            1. A can select a key and physically deliver it to B.
                            2. A third party can select the key and physically deliver it to A and B.
                            3. If A and B have previously and recently used a key, one party can transmit the

                                new key to the other, encrypted using the old key.
                            4. If A and B each has an encrypted connection to a third party C, C can deliver

                                a key on the encrypted links to A and B.

                                Options 1 and 2 call for manual delivery of a key. For link encryption, this
                         is a reasonable requirement, because each link encryption device is going to be
                         exchanging data only with its partner on the other end of the link. However, for
                         end-to-end encryption over a network, manual delivery is awkward. In a distributed
                         system, any given host or terminal may need to engage in exchanges with many other

Hiva-Network.Com
14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 443

Number of keys  109
                108
                107
                106

                     5 6 7 89          2  3 4 5 6 7 89         2  3 4 5 6 7 89

                                  103     104                                   105

                                          Number of endpoints

Figure 14.1 Number of Keys Required to Support Arbitrary Connections between
                 Endpoints

hosts and terminals over time. Thus, each device needs a number of keys supplied
dynamically. The problem is especially difficult in a wide-area distributed system.

       The scale of the problem depends on the number of communicating pairs that
must be supported. If end-to-end encryption is done at a network or IP level, then a
key is needed for each pair of hosts on the network that wish to communicate. Thus,
if there are N hosts, the number of required keys is [N(N - 1)]/2. If encryption is
done at the application level, then a key is needed for every pair of users or pro-
cesses that require communication. Thus, a network may have hundreds of hosts
but thousands of users and processes. Figure 14.1 illustrates the magnitude of the
key distribution task for end-to-end encryption.1 A network using node-level
encryption with 1000 nodes would conceivably need to distribute as many as half a
million keys. If that same network supported 10,000 applications, then as many as
50 million keys may be required for application-level encryption.

       Returning to our list, option 3 is a possibility for either link encryption or
end-to-end encryption, but if an attacker ever succeeds in gaining access to one key,
then all subsequent keys will be revealed. Furthermore, the initial distribution of
potentially millions of keys still must be made.

1Note that this figure uses a log-log scale, so that a linear graph indicates exponential growth. A basic
review of log scales is in the math refresher document at the Computer Science Student Resource Site at
WilliamStallings.com/StudentSupport.html.
444 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

Data          Cryptographic
                protection

Session keys  Cryptographic
                protection

Master keys   Non-cryptographic
                   protection

Figure 14.2 The Use of a Key Hierarchy

       For end-to-end encryption, some variation on option 4 has been widely
adopted. In this scheme, a key distribution center is responsible for distributing
keys to pairs of users (hosts, processes, applications) as needed. Each user must
share a unique key with the key distribution center for purposes of key distribution.

       The use of a key distribution center is based on the use of a hierarchy of keys.
At a minimum, two levels of keys are used (Figure 14.2). Communication between
end systems is encrypted using a temporary key, often referred to as a session key.
Typically, the session key is used for the duration of a logical connection, such as a
frame relay connection or transport connection, and then discarded. Each session
key is obtained from the key distribution center over the same networking facili-
ties used for end-user communication. Accordingly, session keys are transmitted in
encrypted form, using a master key that is shared by the key distribution center and
an end system or user.

       For each end system or user, there is a unique master key that it shares with
the key distribution center. Of course, these master keys must be securely distrib-
uted in some fashion. However, the scale of the problem is vastly reduced. If there
are N entities that wish to communicate in pairs, then, as was mentioned, as many
as [N(N - 1)]/2 session keys are needed at any one time. However, only N master
keys are required, one for each entity. Thus, master keys can be distributed in some
non-cryptographic way, such as physical delivery.

A Key Distribution Scenario

The key distribution concept can be deployed in a number of ways. A typical
scenario is illustrated in Figure 14.3, which is based on a figure in [POPE79]. The sce-
nario assumes that each user shares a unique master key with the key distribution
center (KDC).

       Let us assume that user A wishes to establish a logical connection with B and
requires a one-time session key to protect the data transmitted over the connection.
14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 445

Key Distribution  Initiator A  Responder B
 Center (KDC)

         Key          (1) IDA || IDB || N1
distribution
               (2) E(Ka, [Ks || IDA || IDB || N1])
        steps          || E(Kb, [Ks || IDA])
                                                            (3) E(Kb, [Ks || IDA])
                                                                 (4) E(Ks, N2)      Authentication
                                                                                    steps
                                                                (5) E(Ks, f(N2))

    Figure 14.3 Key Distribution Scenario

A has a master key, Ka, known only to itself and the KDC; similarly, B shares the
master key Kb with the KDC. The following steps occur.

   1. A issues a request to the KDC for a session key to protect a logical connection
       to B. The message includes the identity of A and B and a unique identifier, N1,
       for this transaction, which we refer to as a nonce. The nonce may be a timestamp,
       a counter, or a random number; the minimum requirement is that it differs with
       each request. Also, to prevent masquerade, it should be difficult for an opponent
       to guess the nonce. Thus, a random number is a good choice for a nonce.

   2. The KDC responds with a message encrypted using Ka. Thus, A is the only one
       who can successfully read the message, and A knows that it originated at the
       KDC. The message includes two items intended for A:

          The one-time session key, Ks, to be used for the session
          The original request message, including the nonce, to enable A to match

            this response with the appropriate request

       Thus, A can verify that its original request was not altered before reception by
       the KDC and, because of the nonce, that this is not a replay of some previous
       request.

       In addition, the message includes two items intended for B:

          The one-time session key, Ks, to be used for the session
          An identifier of A (e.g., its network address), IDA
       These last two items are encrypted with Kb (the master key that the KDC
       shares with B). They are to be sent to B to establish the connection and prove
       A's identity.
446 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

              3. A stores the session key for use in the upcoming session and forwards to B
                  the information that originated at the KDC for B, namely, E(Kb,[Ks } IDA]).
                  Because this information is encrypted with Kb, it is protected from eavesdrop-
                  ping. B now knows the session key (Ks), knows that the other party is A (from
                  IDA), and knows that the information originated at the KDC (because it is
                  encrypted using Kb).

                  At this point, a session key has been securely delivered to A and B, and they
          may begin their protected exchange. However, two additional steps are desirable:

              4. Using the newly minted session key for encryption, B sends a nonce, N2, to A.
              5. Also, using Ks, A responds with f(N2), where f is a function that performs some

                  transformation on N2 (e.g., adding one).

          These steps assure B that the original message it received (step 3) was not a replay.
                  Note that the actual key distribution involves only steps 1 through 3, but that

          steps 4 and 5, as well as step 3, perform an authentication function.

         Hierarchical Key Control

          It is not necessary to limit the key distribution function to a single KDC. Indeed, for
          very large networks, it may not be practical to do so. As an alternative, a hierarchy
          of KDCs can be established. For example, there can be local KDCs, each respon-
          sible for a small domain of the overall internetwork, such as a single LAN or a single
          building. For communication among entities within the same local domain, the local
          KDC is responsible for key distribution. If two entities in different domains desire a
          shared key, then the corresponding local KDCs can communicate through a global
          KDC. In this case, any one of the three KDCs involved can actually select the key.
          The hierarchical concept can be extended to three or even more layers, depending
          on the size of the user population and the geographic scope of the internetwork.

                  A hierarchical scheme minimizes the effort involved in master key distri-
          bution, because most master keys are those shared by a local KDC with its local
          entities. Furthermore, such a scheme limits the damage of a faulty or subverted
          KDC to its local area only.

         Session Key Lifetime

          The more frequently session keys are exchanged, the more secure they are, because
          the opponent has less ciphertext to work with for any given session key. On the
          other hand, the distribution of session keys delays the start of any exchange and
          places a burden on network capacity. A security manager must try to balance these
          competing considerations in determining the lifetime of a particular session key.

                  For connection-oriented protocols, one obvious choice is to use the same ses-
          sion key for the length of time that the connection is open, using a new session key
          for each new session. If a logical connection has a very long lifetime, then it would
          be prudent to change the session key periodically, perhaps every time the PDU
          (protocol data unit) sequence number cycles.

                  For a connectionless protocol, such as a transaction-oriented protocol, there
          is no explicit connection initiation or termination. Thus, it is not obvious how often
          one needs to change the session key. The most secure approach is to use a new
14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 447

session key for each exchange. However, this negates one of the principal benefits
of connectionless protocols, which is minimum overhead and delay for each transac-
tion. A better strategy is to use a given session key for a certain fixed period only or
for a certain number of transactions.

A Transparent Key Control Scheme

The approach suggested in Figure 14.3 has many variations, one of which is
described in this subsection. The scheme (Figure 14.4) is useful for providing
end-to-end encryption at a network or transport level in a way that is transpar-
ent to the end users. The approach assumes that communication makes use of a
connection-oriented end-to-end protocol, such as TCP. The noteworthy element of
this approach is a session security module (SSM), which may consist of functionality

                                                   Key
                                               distribution

                                                  center

1. Host sends packet requesting connection.
2. Security service buffers packet; asks

   KDC for session key.
3. KDC distributes session key to both hosts.
4. Buffered packet transmitted.

Application                                    2                         Application
      1                                                           3
                                                                           Security
  Security                                             Network              service
   service
                                                                    4      HOST
  HOST

Figure 14.4 Automatic Key Distribution for Connection-Oriented Protocol
448 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

          at one protocol layer, that performs end-to-end encryption and obtains session keys
          on behalf of its host or terminal.

                  The steps involved in establishing a connection are shown in Figure 14.4. When
          one host wishes to set up a connection to another host, it transmits a connection-
          request packet (step 1). The SSM saves that packet and applies to the KDC for
          permission to establish the connection (step 2). The communication between the
          SSM and the KDC is encrypted using a master key shared only by this SSM and
          the KDC. If the KDC approves the connection request, it generates the session
          key and delivers it to the two appropriate SSMs, using a unique permanent key for
          each SSM (step 3). The requesting SSM can now release the connection request
          packet, and a connection is set up between the two end systems (step 4). All user
          data exchanged between the two end systems are encrypted by their respective SSMs
          using the one-time session key.

                  The automated key distribution approach provides the flexibility and dynamic
          characteristics needed to allow a number of terminal users to access a number of
          hosts and for the hosts to exchange data with each other.

         Decentralized Key Control

          The use of a key distribution center imposes the requirement that the KDC be
          trusted and be protected from subversion. This requirement can be avoided if key
          distribution is fully decentralized. Although full decentralization is not practical for
          larger networks using symmetric encryption only, it may be useful within a local
          context.

                  A decentralized approach requires that each end system be able to commu-
          nicate in a secure manner with all potential partner end systems for purposes of
          session key distribution. Thus, there may need to be as many as [n(n - 1)]/2 master
          keys for a configuration with n end systems.

                  A session key may be established with the following sequence of steps
          (Figure 14.5).

              1. A issues a request to B for a session key and includes a nonce, N1.
              2. B responds with a message that is encrypted using the shared master key. The

                  response includes the session key selected by B, an identifier of B, the value
                  f(N1), and another nonce, N2.
              3. Using the new session key, A returns f(N2) to B.

                                                              (1) IDA || N1

Initiator                                                                      Responder
    A                                                                               B

           (2) E(Km, [Ks || IDA || IDB || f(N1) || N2 ])

                                                             (3) E(Ks, f(N2))
Figure 14.5 Decentralized Key Distribution
14.1 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 449

       Thus, although each node must maintain at most (n - 1) master keys, as many
session keys as required may be generated and used. Because the messages trans-
ferred using the master key are short, cryptanalysis is difficult. As before, session
keys are used for only a limited time to protect them.

Controlling Key Usage

The concept of a key hierarchy and the use of automated key distribution techniques
greatly reduce the number of keys that must be manually managed and distributed.
It also may be desirable to impose some control on the way in which automatically
distributed keys are used. For example, in addition to separating master keys from
session keys, we may wish to define different types of session keys on the basis of
use, such as

    Data-encrypting key, for general communication across a network
    PIN-encrypting key, for personal identification numbers (PINs) used in

       electronic funds transfer and point-of-sale applications
    File-encrypting key, for encrypting files stored in publicly accessible locations

       To illustrate the value of separating keys by type, consider the risk that a master
key is imported as a data-encrypting key into a device. Normally, the master key is
physically secured within the cryptographic hardware of the key distribution center
and of the end systems. Session keys encrypted with this master key are available to
application programs, as are the data encrypted with such session keys. However,
if a master key is treated as a session key, it may be possible for an unauthorized
application to obtain plaintext of session keys encrypted with that master key.

       Thus, it may be desirable to institute controls in systems that limit the ways
in which keys are used, based on characteristics associated with those keys. One
simple plan is to associate a tag with each key ([JONE82]; see also [DAVI89]).
The proposed technique is for use with DES and makes use of the extra 8 bits in
each 64-bit DES key. That is, the eight non-key bits ordinarily reserved for parity
checking form the key tag. The bits have the following interpretation:

    One bit indicates whether the key is a session key or a master key
    One bit indicates whether the key can be used for encryption
    One bit indicates whether the key can be used for decryption
    The remaining bits are spares for future use.

Because the tag is embedded in the key, it is encrypted along with the key when that
key is distributed, thus providing protection. The drawbacks of this scheme are

   1. The tag length is limited to 8 bits, limiting its flexibility and functionality.
   2. Because the tag is not transmitted in clear form, it can be used only at the

       point of decryption, limiting the ways in which key use can be controlled.

       A more flexible scheme, referred to as the control vector, is described in
[MATY91a and b]. In this scheme, each session key has an associated control vector
consisting of a number of fields that specify the uses and restrictions for that session
key. The length of the control vector may vary.
450 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

Control   Master  Session                Control      Master  Encrypted
 vector     key     key                   vector        key   session key

Hashing                                  Hashing
function                                 function

          Key                 Plaintext               Key                 Ciphertext
          input                 input                 input                  input

                 Encryption                                  Decryption
                  function                                    function

                 Encrypted                                   Session key
                 session key

                    (a) Control vector encryption     (b) Control vector decryption
Figure 14.6 Control Vector Encryption and Decryption

       The control vector is cryptographically coupled with the key at the time of
key generation at the KDC. The coupling and decoupling processes are illustrated
in Figure 14.6. As a first step, the control vector is passed through a hash func-
tion that produces a value whose length is equal to the encryption key length. Hash
functions are discussed in detail in Chapter 11. In essence, a hash function maps
values from a larger range into a smaller range with a reasonably uniform spread.
Thus, for example, if numbers in the range 1 to 100 are hashed into numbers in the
range 1 to 10, approximately 10% of the source values should map into each of the
target values.

       The hash value is then XORed with the master key to produce an output that
is used as the key input for encrypting the session key. Thus,

                                 Hash value = H = h(CV)

                                   Key input = Km  H
                                  Ciphertext = E([Km  H], Ks)

where Km is the master key and Ks is the session key. The session key is recovered
in plaintext by the reverse operation:

                                  D([Km  H], E([Km  H], Ks))

       When a session key is delivered to a user from the KDC, it is accompanied
by the control vector in clear form. The session key can be recovered only by using
both the master key that the user shares with the KDC and the control vector. Thus,
the linkage between the session key and its control vector is maintained.
14.2 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 451

         Use of the control vector has two advantages over use of an 8-bit tag. First,
 there is no restriction on length of the control vector, which enables arbitrarily com-
 plex controls to be imposed on key use. Second, the control vector is available in
 clear form at all stages of operation. Thus, control of key use can be exercised in
 multiple locations.

14.2 SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING
      ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION

        Because of the inefficiency of public-key cryptosystems, they are almost never used
        for the direct encryption of sizable blocks of data, but are limited to relatively small
        blocks. One of the most important uses of a public-key cryptosystem is to encrypt
        secret keys for distribution. We see many specific examples of this in Part Five.
        Here, we discuss general principles and typical approaches.

      Simple Secret Key Distribution

        An extremely simple scheme was put forward by Merkle [MERK79], as illustrated
        in Figure 14.7. If A wishes to communicate with B, the following procedure is
        employed:

           1. A generates a public/private key pair {PUa, PRa} and transmits a message to B
               consisting of PUa and an identifier of A, IDA.

           2. B generates a secret key, Ks, and transmits it to A, which is encrypted with A's
               public key.

           3. A computes D(PRa, E(PUa, Ks)) to recover the secret key. Because only A can
               decrypt the message, only A and B will know the identity of Ks.

           4. A discards PUa and PRa and B discards PUa.

               A and B can now securely communicate using conventional encryption and
        the session key Ks. At the completion of the exchange, both A and B discard Ks.
        Despite its simplicity, this is an attractive protocol. No keys exist before the start of
        the communication and none exist after the completion of communication. Thus,
        the risk of compromise of the keys is minimal. At the same time, the communication
        is secure from eavesdropping.

               The protocol depicted in Figure 14.7 is insecure against an adversary who can
        intercept messages and then either relay the intercepted message or substitute another
        message (see Figure 1.3c). Such an attack is known as a man-in-the-middle attack
        [RIVE84]. We saw this type of attack in Chapter 10 (Figure 10.2). In the present

                                                               (1) PUa || IDA

A                                                                                                   B

                                                                                    (2) E(PUa, Ks)
                Figure 14.7 Simple Use of Public-Key Encryption to Establish a Session Key

Hiva-Network.Com
452 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

          case, if an adversary, D, has control of the intervening communication channel,
          then D can compromise the communication in the following fashion without being
          detected (Figure 14.8).

              1. A generates a public/private key pair {PUa, PRa} and transmits a message
                  intended for B consisting of PUa and an identifier of A, IDA.

              2. D intercepts the message, creates its own public/private key pair {PUd, PRd}
                  and transmits PUd } IDA to B.

              3. B generates a secret key, Ks, and transmits E(PUd, Ks).
              4. D intercepts the message and learns Ks by computing D(PRd, E(PUd, Ks)).
              5. D transmits E(PUa, Ks) to A.

    Alice                     Darth                      Bob

Private key PRa
Public key PUa

                    PUa, IDA

                              Private key PRd
                              Public key PUd

                                               PUd, IDA

                                                                      Private key PRb
                                                                      Public key PUb
                                                                      Secret key Ks

                                                     E(PUd, Ks)

                              Ks =
                              D(PRd, E(PUd, Ks))

E(PUa, Ks)

                                  Alice, Bob, and
                                  Darth share K1

Figure 14.8 Another Man-in-the-Middle Attack
14.2 / SYMMETRIC KEY DISTRIBUTION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 453

         The result is that both A and B know Ks and are unaware that Ks has also been
 revealed to D. A and B can now exchange messages using Ks. D no longer actively
 interferes with the communications channel but simply eavesdrops. Knowing Ks,
 D can decrypt all messages, and both A and B are unaware of the problem. Thus,
 this simple protocol is only useful in an environment where the only threat is
 eavesdropping.

 Secret Key Distribution with Confidentiality
 and Authentication

 Figure 14.9, based on an approach suggested in [NEED78], provides protection
 against both active and passive attacks. We begin at a point when it is assumed that
 A and B have exchanged public keys by one of the schemes described subsequently
 in this chapter. Then the following steps occur.

     1. A uses B's public key to encrypt a message to B containing an identifier of
         A(IDA) and a nonce (N1), which is used to identify this transaction uniquely.

     2. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and containing A's nonce (N1)
         as well as a new nonce generated by B (N2). Because only B could have
         decrypted message (1), the presence of N1 in message (2) assures A that the
         correspondent is B.

     3. A returns N2, encrypted using B's public key, to assure B that its correspon-
         dent is A.

     4. A selects a secret key Ks and sends M = E(PUb, E(PRa, Ks)) to B. Encryption
         of this message with B's public key ensures that only B can read it; encryption
         with A's private key ensures that only A could have sent it.

     5. B computes D(PUa, D(PRb, M)) to recover the secret key.

         The result is that this scheme ensures both confidentiality and authentication
 in the exchange of a secret key.

                                                             (1) E(PUb, [N1 || IDA])  Responder
                                                                                           B
                                                              (2) E(PUa, [N1 || N2])

   Initiator
       A

                                                                  (3) E(PUb, N2)

                                                             (4) E(PUb, E(PRa, Ks))
Figure 14.9 Public-Key Distribution of Secret Keys
454 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

         A Hybrid Scheme

          Yet another way to use public-key encryption to distribute secret keys is a hybrid
          approach in use on IBM mainframes [LE93]. This scheme retains the use of a key
          distribution center (KDC) that shares a secret master key with each user and dis-
          tributes secret session keys encrypted with the master key. A public-key scheme is
          used to distribute the master keys. The following rationale is provided for using this
          three-level approach:

              Performance: There are many applications, especially transaction-oriented
                  applications, in which the session keys change frequently. Distribution of ses-
                  sion keys by public-key encryption could degrade overall system performance
                  because of the relatively high computational load of public-key encryption
                  and decryption. With a three-level hierarchy, public-key encryption is used
                  only occasionally to update the master key between a user and the KDC.

              Backward compatibility: The hybrid scheme is easily overlaid on an existing
                  KDC scheme with minimal disruption or software changes.

                  The addition of a public-key layer provides a secure, efficient means of dis-
          tributing master keys. This is an advantage in a configuration in which a single KDC
          serves a widely distributed set of users.

  14.3 DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS

          Several techniques have been proposed for the distribution of public keys. Virtually
          all these proposals can be grouped into the following general schemes:

              Public announcement
              Publicly available directory
              Public-key authority
              Public-key certificates

         Public Announcement of Public Keys

          On the face of it, the point of public-key encryption is that the public key is public.
          Thus, if there is some broadly accepted public-key algorithm, such as RSA, any
          participant can send his or her public key to any other participant or broadcast the
          key to the community at large (Figure 14.10). For example, because of the growing
          popularity of PGP (pretty good privacy, discussed in Chapter 19), which makes use
          of RSA, many PGP users have adopted the practice of appending their public key
          to messages that they send to public forums, such as USENET newsgroups and
          Internet mailing lists.

                  Although this approach is convenient, it has a major weakness. Anyone can
          forge such a public announcement. That is, some user could pretend to be user A
          and send a public key to another participant or broadcast such a public key. Until
          such time as user A discovers the forgery and alerts other participants, the forger is
          able to read all encrypted messages intended for A and can use the forged keys for
          authentication (see Figure 9.3).
        14.3 / DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS 455

                        PUa                        PUb
                        PUa                        PUb

     A                                                        B

                        PUa                        PUb
                        PUa                        PUb

Figure 14.10 Uncontrolled Public-Key Distribution

        Public-key
        directory

   PUa                                             PUb

A                                                       B

  Figure 14.11 Public-Key Publication

Publicly Available Directory

A greater degree of security can be achieved by maintaining a publicly available
dynamic directory of public keys. Maintenance and distribution of the public
directory would have to be the responsibility of some trusted entity or organization
(Figure 14.11). Such a scheme would include the following elements:

   1. The authority maintains a directory with a {name, public key} entry for each
       participant.

   2. Each participant registers a public key with the directory authority.
       Registration would have to be in person or by some form of secure authenti-
       cated communication.

   3. A participant may replace the existing key with a new one at any time, either
       because of the desire to replace a public key that has already been used for
       a large amount of data, or because the corresponding private key has been
       compromised in some way.

   4. Participants could also access the directory electronically. For this purpose,
       secure, authenticated communication from the authority to the participant is
       mandatory.
456 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                  This scheme is clearly more secure than individual public announcements
          but still has vulnerabilities. If an adversary succeeds in obtaining or computing the
          private key of the directory authority, the adversary could authoritatively pass out
          counterfeit public keys and subsequently impersonate any participant and eaves-
          drop on messages sent to any participant. Another way to achieve the same end is
          for the adversary to tamper with the records kept by the authority.

         Public-Key Authority

          Stronger security for public-key distribution can be achieved by providing tighter
          control over the distribution of public keys from the directory. A typical scenario is
          illustrated in Figure 14.12, which is based on a figure in [POPE79]. As before, the
          scenario assumes that a central authority maintains a dynamic directory of public
          keys of all participants. In addition, each participant reliably knows a public key for
          the authority, with only the authority knowing the corresponding private key. The
          following steps (matched by number to Figure 14.12) occur.

              1. A sends a timestamped message to the public-key authority containing a
                  request for the current public key of B.

              2. The authority responds with a message that is encrypted using the authority's
                  private key, PRauth. Thus, A is able to decrypt the message using the author-
                  ity's public key. Therefore, A is assured that the message originated with the
                  authority. The message includes the following:

                     B's public key, PUb, which A can use to encrypt messages destined for B
                     The original request used to enable A to match this response with the cor-

                       responding earlier request and to verify that the original request was not
                       altered before reception by the authority

                     The original timestamp given so A can determine that this is not an old mes-
                       sage from the authority containing a key other than B's current public key

              3. A stores B's public key and also uses it to encrypt a message to B containing
                  an identifier of A (IDA) and a nonce (N1), which is used to identify this trans-
                  action uniquely.

           4, 5. B retrieves A's public key from the authority in the same manner as A retrieved
                  B's public key.

                  At this point, public keys have been securely delivered to A and B, and they
          may begin their protected exchange. However, two additional steps are desirable:

              6. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and containing A's nonce (N1)
                  as well as a new nonce generated by B (N2). Because only B could have
                  decrypted message (3), the presence of N1 in message (6) assures A that the
                  correspondent is B.

              7. A returns N2, which is encrypted using B's public key, to assure B that its
                  correspondent is A.

                  Thus, a total of seven messages are required. However, the initial five
          messages need be used only infrequently because both A and B can save the other's
          public key for future use--a technique known as caching. Periodically, a user should
          request fresh copies of the public keys of its correspondents to ensure currency.
                             14.3 / DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC KEYS 457

Initiator A                  Public-key                     Responder B
                             authority

         (1) Request || T1
(2) E(PRauth, [PUb || Request || T1])

    (3) E(PUb, [ IDA || N1])

                                         (4) Request || T2

                                       (5) E(PRauth, [PUa || Request || T2])

                                         (6) E(PUa, [ N1 || N2])

             (7) E(PUb, N2)

          Figure 14.12 Public-Key Distribution Scenario

Public-Key Certificates

The scenario of Figure 14.12 is attractive, yet it has some drawbacks. The public-key
authority could be somewhat of a bottleneck in the system, for a user must appeal
to the authority for a public key for every other user that it wishes to contact.
As before, the directory of names and public keys maintained by the authority is
vulnerable to tampering.

       An alternative approach, first suggested by Kohnfelder [KOHN78], is to use
certificates that can be used by participants to exchange keys without contacting a
public-key authority, in a way that is as reliable as if the keys were obtained directly
from a public-key authority. In essence, a certificate consists of a public key, an
identifier of the key owner, and the whole block signed by a trusted third party.
Typically, the third party is a certificate authority, such as a government agency or
a financial institution, that is trusted by the user community. A user can present
his or her public key to the authority in a secure manner and obtain a certificate.
The user can then publish the certificate. Anyone needing this user's public key can
obtain the certificate and verify that it is valid by way of the attached trusted signa-
ture. A participant can also convey its key information to another by transmitting
its certificate. Other participants can verify that the certificate was created by the
authority. We can place the following requirements on this scheme:

   1. Any participant can read a certificate to determine the name and public key of
       the certificate's owner.

   2. Any participant can verify that the certificate originated from the certificate
       authority and is not counterfeit.

   3. Only the certificate authority can create and update certificates.
458 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

          These requirements are satisfied by the original proposal in [KOHN78]. Denning
          [DENN83] added the following additional requirement:

              4. Any participant can verify the time validity of the certificate.

                  A certificate scheme is illustrated in Figure 14.13. Each participant applies
          to the certificate authority, supplying a public key and requesting a certificate.
          Application must be in person or by some form of secure authenticated communi-
          cation. For participant A, the authority provides a certificate of the form

                                            CA = E(PRauth, [T } IDA } PUa])

          where PRauth is the private key used by the authority and T is a timestamp. A may
          then pass this certificate on to any other participant, who reads and verifies the
          certificate as follows:

                 D(PUauth, CA) = D(PUauth, E(PRauth, [T } IDA } PUa])) = (T } IDA } PUa)

                  The recipient uses the authority's public key, PUauth, to decrypt the certifi-
          cate. Because the certificate is readable only using the authority's public key, this
          verifies that the certificate came from the certificate authority. The elements IDA
          and PUa provide the recipient with the name and public key of the certificate's
          holder. The timestamp T validates the currency of the certificate. The timestamp

        Certificate

        Authority

   PUa                                                                 PUb

   CA = E(PRauth, [T1 || IDA || PUa])
                                                 CB = E(PRauth, [T2 || IDB || PUb])

A                                                                                    B

        (a) Obtaining certificates from CA

        (1) CA

A                                                                                    B

        (2) CB

                                          (b) Exchanging certificates
Figure 14.13 Exchange of Public-Key Certificates
                                                            14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 459

        counters the following scenario. A's private key is learned by an adversary.
        A generates a new private/public key pair and applies to the certificate authority
        for a new certificate. Meanwhile, the adversary replays the old certificate to B. If B
        then encrypts messages using the compromised old public key, the adversary can
        read those messages.

               In this context, the compromise of a private key is comparable to the loss of a
        credit card. The owner cancels the credit card number but is at risk until all possible
        communicants are aware that the old credit card is obsolete. Thus, the timestamp
        serves as something like an expiration date. If a certificate is sufficiently old, it is
        assumed to be expired.

               One scheme has become universally accepted for formatting public-key
        certificates: the X.509 standard. X.509 certificates are used in most network security
        applications, including IP security, transport layer security (TLS), and S/MIME, all
        of which are discussed in Part Five. X.509 is examined in detail in the next section.

14.4 X.509 CERTIFICATES

        ITU-T recommendation X.509 is part of the X.500 series of recommendations that
        define a directory service. The directory is, in effect, a server or distributed set
        of servers that maintains a database of information about users. The information
        includes a mapping from user name to network address, as well as other attributes
        and information about the users.

               X.509 defines a framework for the provision of authentication services by the
        X.500 directory to its users. The directory may serve as a repository of public-key
        certificates of the type discussed in Section 14.3. Each certificate contains the public
        key of a user and is signed with the private key of a trusted certification authority.
        In addition, X.509 defines alternative authentication protocols based on the use of
        public-key certificates.

               X.509 is an important standard because the certificate structure and authenti-
        cation protocols defined in X.509 are used in a variety of contexts. For example, the
        X.509 certificate format is used in S/MIME (Chapter 19), IP Security (Chapter 20),
        and SSL/TLS (Chapter 17).

               X.509 was initially issued in 1988. The standard was subsequently revised
        in 1993 to address some of the security concerns documented in [IANS90] and
        [MITC90]. The standard is currently at version 7, issued in 2012.

               X.509 is based on the use of public-key cryptography and digital signatures.
        The standard does not dictate the use of a specific digital signature algorithm nor a
        specific hash function. Figure 14.14 illustrates the overall X.509 scheme for genera-
        tion of a public-key certificate. The certificate for Bob's public key includes unique
        identifying information for Bob, Bob's public key, and identifying information
        about the CA, plus other information as explained subsequently. This information
        is then signed by computing a hash value of the information and generating a digital
        signature using the hash value and the CA's private key. X.509 indicates that the
        signature is formed by encrypting the hash value. This suggests the use of one of the
        RSA schemes discussed in Section 13.6. However, the current version of X.509 does
460 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                  Unsigned certificate:      Bob's ID
                  contains user ID,        information
                  user's public key
                                         Bob's public key

    H                                           CA           H
                                          information
                           E                                                        Recipient can verify
                                         Signed certificate                         signature by comparing
Generate hash                                                                       hash code values
code of unsigned
certificate                                                  D

                  Encrypt hash code                          Decrypt signature
                  with CA's private key                      with CA's public key
                  to form signature                          to recover hash code

                              Create signed                  Use certificate to
                              digital certificate            verify Bob's public key

Figure 14.14 X.509 Public-Key Certificate Use

not dictate a specific digital signature algorithm. If the NIST DSA (Section 13.4) or
the ECDSA (Section 13.5) scheme is used, then the hash value is not encrypted but
serves as input to a digital signature generation algorithm.

Certif icates

The heart of the X.509 scheme is the public-key certificate associated with each
user. These user certificates are assumed to be created by some trusted certification
authority (CA) and placed in the directory by the CA or by the user. The directory
server itself is not responsible for the creation of public keys or for the certifica-
tion function; it merely provides an easily accessible location for users to obtain
certificates.

       Figure 14.15a shows the general format of a certificate, which includes the
following elements.

    Version: Differentiates among successive versions of the certificate format; the
       default is version 1. If the issuer unique identifier or subject unique identifier
       are present, the value must be version 2. If one or more extensions are present,
       the version must be version 3. Although the X.509 specification is currently at
       version 7, no changes have been made to the fields that make up the certificate
       since version 3.

    Serial number: An integer value unique within the issuing CA that is unam-
       biguously associated with this certificate.

    Signature algorithm identifier: The algorithm used to sign the certificate
       together with any associated parameters. Because this information is repeated
       in the signature field at the end of the certificate, this field has little, if any, utility.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                                               14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 461

            Version                                            Signature      Algorithm
                                                               algorithm     Parameters
                                                               identifier
                                                                            Issuer name
             Certificate
Signature   serial number                                                   This update date
algorithm
identifier     Algorithm                Version 1
              Parameters                      Version 2
                                                    Version 3                Next update date
            Issuer name
                                                                            User certificate serial #
Period of   Not before                                          Revoked         Revocation date
 validity   Not after                                          certificate

Subject's   Subject name                                                                ·
public key                                                                              ·
                Algorithms                                                              ·
   info         Parameters
                                                                            User certificate serial #
                     Key                                        Revoked         Revocation date
                                                               certificate           Algorithms
            Issuer unique                                                           Parameters
               identifier                                      Signature
                                                                             Signature of certificate
            Subject unique
               identifier

                Extensions                                                  (b) Certificate revocation list

Signature          Algorithms           All
                   Parameters              versions
            Signature of certificate

                 (a) X.509 certificate
Figure 14.15 X.509 Formats

    Issuer name: X.500 name of the CA that created and signed this certificate.

    Period of validity: Consists of two dates: the first and last on which the certifi-
       cate is valid.

    Subject name: The name of the user to whom this certificate refers. That is, this
       certificate certifies the public key of the subject who holds the corresponding
       private key.

    Subject's public-key information: The public key of the subject, plus an identi-
       fier of the algorithm for which this key is to be used, together with any associ-
       ated parameters.

    Issuer unique identifier: An optional-bit string field used to identify uniquely
       the issuing CA in the event the X.500 name has been reused for different
       entities.

    Subject unique identifier: An optional-bit string field used to identify uniquely
       the subject in the event the X.500 name has been reused for different entities.

    Extensions: A set of one or more extension fields. Extensions were added in
       version 3 and are discussed later in this section.

    Signature: Covers all of the other fields of the certificate. One component of
       this field is the digital signature applied to the other fields of the certificate.
       This field includes the signature algorithm identifier.

       The unique identifier fields were added in version 2 to handle the possible
reuse of subject and/or issuer names over time. These fields are rarely used.
462 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                  The standard uses the following notation to define a certificate:

                         CA V A W = CA {V, SN, AI, CA, UCA, A, UA, Ap, TA}

          where

                  Y V X W = the certificate of user X issued by certification authority Y
                           Y {I} = the signing of I by Y. It consists of I with an encrypted hash
                                      code appended
                               V = version of the certificate
                             SN = serial number of the certificate
                             AI = identifier of the algorithm used to sign the certificate
                            CA = name of certificate authority
                          UCA = optional unique identifier of the CA
                              A = name of user A
                            UA = optional unique identifier of the user A
                             Ap = public key of user A
                             TA = period of validity of the certificate

                  The CA signs the certificate with its private key. If the corresponding public
          key is known to a user, then that user can verify that a certificate signed by the CA is
          valid. This is the typical digital signature approach illustrated in Figure 13.2.

          OBTAINING A USER'S CERTIFICATE User certificates generated by a CA have the
          following characteristics:

              Any user with access to the public key of the CA can verify the user public key
                  that was certified.

              No party other than the certification authority can modify the certificate
                  without this being detected.

          Because certificates are unforgeable, they can be placed in a directory without the
          need for the directory to make special efforts to protect them.

                  If all users subscribe to the same CA, then there is a common trust of that CA.
          All user certificates can be placed in the directory for access by all users. In addi-
          tion, a user can transmit his or her certificate directly to other users. In either case,
          once B is in possession of A's certificate, B has confidence that messages it encrypts
          with A's public key will be secure from eavesdropping and that messages signed
          with A's private key are unforgeable.

                  If there is a large community of users, it may not be practical for all users to
          subscribe to the same CA. Because it is the CA that signs certificates, each partici-
          pating user must have a copy of the CA's own public key to verify signatures. This
          public key must be provided to each user in an absolutely secure (with respect
          to integrity and authenticity) way so that the user has confidence in the associ-
          ated certificates. Thus, with many users, it may be more practical for there to be
          a number of CAs, each of which securely provides its public key to some fraction
          of the users.
                                                      14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 463

       Now suppose that A has obtained a certificate from certification authority
X1 and B has obtained a certificate from CA X2. If A does not securely know the
public key of X2, then B's certificate, issued by X2, is useless to A. A can read B's
certificate, but A cannot verify the signature. However, if the two CAs have securely
exchanged their own public keys, the following procedure will enable A to obtain
B's public key.

Step 1 A obtains from the directory the certificate of X2 signed by X1. Because
          A securely knows X1>s public key, A can obtain X2>s public key from its
          certificate and verify it by means of X1>s signature on the certificate.

Step 2 A then goes back to the directory and obtains the certificate of B signed by
          X2. Because A now has a trusted copy of X2>s public key, A can verify the
          signature and securely obtain B's public key.

       A has used a chain of certificates to obtain B's public key. In the notation of
X.509, this chain is expressed as

                                     X1 V X2 W X2 V B W

       In the same fashion, B can obtain A's public key with the reverse chain:

                                     X2 V X1 W X1 V A W

       This scheme need not be limited to a chain of two certificates. An arbitrarily
long path of CAs can be followed to produce a chain. A chain with N elements
would be expressed as

                         X1 V X2 W X2 V X3 W c XN V B W

       In this case, each pair of CAs in the chain (Xi, Xi+1) must have created certifi-
cates for each other.

       All these certificates of CAs by CAs need to appear in the directory, and the
user needs to know how they are linked to follow a path to another user's public-key
certificate. X.509 suggests that CAs be arranged in a hierarchy so that navigation is
straightforward.

       Figure 14.16, taken from X.509, is an example of such a hierarchy. The con-
nected circles indicate the hierarchical relationship among the CAs; the associated
boxes indicate certificates maintained in the directory for each CA entry. The direc-
tory entry for each CA includes two types of certificates:

    Forward certificates: Certificates of X generated by other CAs
    Reverse certificates: Certificates generated by X that are the certificates of

       other CAs

       In this example, user A can acquire the following certificates from the direc-
tory to establish a certification path to B:

               X VWW W VVW V VYW Y VZW Z VBW

       When A has obtained these certificates, it can unwrap the certification path in
sequence to recover a trusted copy of B's public key. Using this public key, A can
send encrypted messages to B. If A wishes to receive encrypted messages back
464 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                          U<<V>>     U
                          V<<U>>
                                             V<<Y>>
                                 V
                                    Y Y<<V>>
V<<W>>

W<<V>> W

W<<X>>                                               Y<<Z>>

X<<W>>  X                                         Z  Z<<Y>>
X<<Z>>                                               Z<<X>>

C          A                                      B

X<<C>>     X<<A>>                   Z<<B>>

Figure 14.16 X.509 Hierarchy: A Hypothetical Example

from B, or to sign messages sent to B, then B will require A's public key, which can
be obtained from the following certification path:

              Z VYW Y VVW V VWW W VXW X VAW

       B can obtain this set of certificates from the directory, or A can provide them
as part of its initial message to B.

REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES Recall from Figure 14.15 that each certificate includes
a period of validity, much like a credit card. Typically, a new certificate is issued just
before the expiration of the old one. In addition, it may be desirable on occasion to
revoke a certificate before it expires, for one of the following reasons.

   1. The user's private key is assumed to be compromised.
   2. The user is no longer certified by this CA. Reasons for this include that the

       subject's name has changed, the certificate is superseded, or the certificate was
       not issued in conformance with the CA's policies.
   3. The CA's certificate is assumed to be compromised.

       Each CA must maintain a list consisting of all revoked but not expired
certificates issued by that CA, including both those issued to users and to other
CAs. These lists should also be posted on the directory.
                                                      14.4 / X.509 CERTIFICATES 465

       Each certificate revocation list (CRL) posted to the directory is signed by the
issuer and includes (Figure 14.15b) the issuer's name, the date the list was created,
the date the next CRL is scheduled to be issued, and an entry for each revoked
certificate. Each entry consists of the serial number of a certificate and revocation
date for that certificate. Because serial numbers are unique within a CA, the serial
number is sufficient to identify the certificate.

       When a user receives a certificate in a message, the user must determine
whether the certificate has been revoked. The user could check the directory each
time a certificate is received. To avoid the delays (and possible costs) associated
with directory searches, it is likely that the user would maintain a local cache of
certificates and lists of revoked certificates.

X.509 Version 3

The X.509 version 2 format does not convey all of the information that recent design
and implementation experience has shown to be needed. [FORD95] lists the follow-
ing requirements not satisfied by version 2.

   1. The subject field is inadequate to convey the identity of a key owner to a
       public-key user. X.509 names may be relatively short and lacking in obvious
       identification details that may be needed by the user.

   2. The subject field is also inadequate for many applications, which typically
       recognize entities by an Internet email address, a URL, or some other Internet-
       related identification.

   3. There is a need to indicate security policy information. This enables a security
       application or function, such as IPSec, to relate an X.509 certificate to a given
       policy.

   4. There is a need to limit the damage that can result from a faulty or malicious
       CA by setting constraints on the applicability of a particular certificate.

   5. It is important to be able to identify different keys used by the same owner at
       different times. This feature supports key lifecycle management: in particular,
       the ability to update key pairs for users and CAs on a regular basis or under
       exceptional circumstances.

       Rather than continue to add fields to a fixed format, standards developers
felt that a more flexible approach was needed. Thus, version 3 includes a number
of optional extensions that may be added to the version 2 format. Each extension
consists of an extension identifier, a criticality indicator, and an extension value.
The criticality indicator indicates whether an extension can be safely ignored. If the
indicator has a value of TRUE and an implementation does not recognize the
extension, it must treat the certificate as invalid.

       The certificate extensions fall into three main categories: key and policy
information, subject and issuer attributes, and certification path constraints.

KEY AND POLICY INFORMATION These extensions convey additional information
about the subject and issuer keys, plus indicators of certificate policy. A certif-
icate policy is a named set of rules that indicates the applicability of a certifi-
cate to a particular community and/or class of application with common security
requirements. For example, a policy might be applicable to the authentication of
466 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

          electronic data interchange (EDI) transactions for the trading of goods within a
          given price range.

                  This area includes:

              Authority key identifier: Identifies the public key to be used to verify the
                  signature on this certificate or CRL. Enables distinct keys of the same CA to
                  be differentiated. One use of this field is to handle CA key pair updating.

              Subject key identifier: Identifies the public key being certified. Useful for sub-
                  ject key pair updating. Also, a subject may have multiple key pairs and, cor-
                  respondingly, different certificates for different purposes (e.g., digital signature
                  and encryption key agreement).

              Key usage: Indicates a restriction imposed as to the purposes for which, and
                  the policies under which, the certified public key may be used. May indicate
                  one or more of the following: digital signature, nonrepudiation, key encryp-
                  tion, data encryption, key agreement, CA signature verification on certificates,
                  CA signature verification on CRLs.

              Private-key usage period: Indicates the period of use of the private key cor-
                  responding to the public key. Typically, the private key is used over a different
                  period from the validity of the public key. For example, with digital signature
                  keys, the usage period for the signing private key is typically shorter than that
                  for the verifying public key.

              Certificate policies: Certificates may be used in environments where multiple
                  policies apply. This extension lists policies that the certificate is recognized as
                  supporting, together with optional qualifier information.

              Policy mappings: Used only in certificates for CAs issued by other CAs. Policy
                  mappings allow an issuing CA to indicate that one or more of that issuer's
                  policies can be considered equivalent to another policy used in the subject
                  CA's domain.

          CERTIFICATE SUBJECT AND ISSUER ATTRIBUTES These extensions support alterna-
          tive names, in alternative formats, for a certificate subject or certificate issuer and
          can convey additional information about the certificate subject to increase a cer-
          tificate user's confidence that the certificate subject is a particular person or entity.
          For example, information such as postal address, position within a corporation, or
          picture image may be required.

                  The extension fields in this area include:

              Subject alternative name: Contains one or more alternative names, using any
                  of a variety of forms. This field is important for supporting certain applications,
                  such as electronic mail, EDI, and IPSec, which may employ their own name
                  forms.

              Issuer alternative name: Contains one or more alternative names, using any of
                  a variety of forms.

              Subject directory attributes: Conveys any desired X.500 directory attribute
                  values for the subject of this certificate.
                                               14.5 / PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE 467

        CERTIFICATION PATH CONSTRAINTS These extensions allow constraint specifications
        to be included in certificates issued for CAs by other CAs. The constraints may
        restrict the types of certificates that can be issued by the subject CA or that may
        occur subsequently in a certification chain.

               The extension fields in this area include:

            Basic constraints: Indicates if the subject may act as a CA. If so, a certification
               path length constraint may be specified.

            Name constraints: Indicates a name space within which all subject names in
               subsequent certificates in a certification path must be located.

            Policy constraints: Specifies constraints that may require explicit certifi-
               cate policy identification or inhibit policy mapping for the remainder of the
               certification path.

14.5 PUBLIC-KEY INFRASTRUCTURE

        RFC 4949 (Internet Security Glossary) defines public-key infrastructure (PKI) as
        the set of hardware, software, people, policies, and procedures needed to create,
        manage, store, distribute, and revoke digital certificates based on asymmetric
        cryptography. The principal objective for developing a PKI is to enable secure,
        convenient, and efficient acquisition of public keys. The Internet Engineering Task
        Force (IETF) Public Key Infrastructure X.509 (PKIX) working group has been the
        driving force behind setting up a formal (and generic) model based on X.509 that is
        suitable for deploying a certificate-based architecture on the Internet. This section
        describes the PKIX model.

               Figure 14.17 shows the interrelationship among the key elements of the PKIX
        model. These elements are

            End entity: A generic term used to denote end users, devices (e.g., servers,
               routers), or any other entity that can be identified in the subject field of a
               public-key certificate. End entities typically consume and/or support PKI-
               related services.

            Certification authority (CA): The issuer of certificates and (usually) certifi-
               cate revocation lists (CRLs). It may also support a variety of administrative
               functions, although these are often delegated to one or more Registration
               Authorities.

            Registration authority (RA): An optional component that can assume a num-
               ber of administrative functions from the CA. The RA is often associated with
               the end entity registration process but can assist in a number of other areas
               as well.

            CRL issuer: An optional component that a CA can delegate to publish CRLs.
            Repository: A generic term used to denote any method for storing certificates

               and CRLs so that they can be retrieved by end entities.
468 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

                                PKI
                               users

                            Certificate/CRL retrieval     End entity

Certificate/CRL Repository                  Registration         Registration,
                                                                 initialization,
                            Certificate authority                certification,
                            publication                          key pair recovery,
                                                                 key pair update
                                      Certificate/CRL            revocation request
                                         publication
                                                          Certificate
                                     CRL      CRL issuer  authority
                                 publication
                                                                        Cross
                                 PKI                                    certification
                            management
                                                               Certificate
                               entities                         authority

Figure 14.17 PKIX Architectural Model

PKIX Management Functions

PKIX identifies a number of management functions that potentially need to be
supported by management protocols. These are indicated in Figure 14.17 and
include the following:

    Registration: This is the process whereby a user first makes itself known to
       a CA (directly or through an RA), prior to that CA issuing a certificate or
       certificates for that user. Registration begins the process of enrolling in a PKI.
       Registration usually involves some offline or online procedure for mutual
       authentication. Typically, the end entity is issued one or more shared secret
       keys used for subsequent authentication.

    Initialization: Before a client system can operate securely, it is necessary to
       install key materials that have the appropriate relationship with keys stored
       elsewhere in the infrastructure. For example, the client needs to be securely
       initialized with the public key and other assured information of the trusted
       CA(s), to be used in validating certificate paths.

    Certification: This is the process in which a CA issues a certificate for a user's
       public key, returns that certificate to the user's client system, and/or posts that
       certificate in a repository.

    Key pair recovery: Key pairs can be used to support digital signature creation
       and verification, encryption and decryption, or both. When a key pair is used for
                   14.6 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 469

       encryption/decryption, it is important to provide a mechanism to recover the
       necessary decryption keys when normal access to the keying material is no longer
       possible, otherwise it will not be possible to recover the encrypted data. Loss of
       access to the decryption key can result from forgotten passwords/PINs, corrupted
       disk drives, damage to hardware tokens, and so on. Key pair recovery allows end
       entities to restore their encryption/decryption key pair from an authorized key
       backup facility (typically, the CA that issued the end entity's certificate).

    Key pair update: All key pairs need to be updated regularly (i.e., replaced
       with a new key pair) and new certificates issued. Update is required when the
       certificate lifetime expires and as a result of certificate revocation.

    Revocation request: An authorized person advises a CA of an abnormal situ-
       ation requiring certificate revocation. Reasons for revocation include private-
       key compromise, change in affiliation, and name change.

    Cross certification: Two CAs exchange information used in establishing a
       cross-certificate. A cross-certificate is a certificate issued by one CA to another
       CA that contains a CA signature key used for issuing certificates.

PKIX Management Protocols

The PKIX working group has defines two alternative management protocols
between PKIX entities that support the management functions listed in the pre-
ceding subsection. RFC 2510 defines the certificate management protocols (CMP).
Within CMP, each of the management functions is explicitly identified by specific
protocol exchanges. CMP is designed to be a flexible protocol able to accommodate
a variety of technical, operational, and business models.

       RFC 2797 defines certificate management messages over CMS (CMC), where
CMS refers to RFC 2630, cryptographic message syntax. CMC is built on earlier work
and is intended to leverage existing implementations. Although all of the PKIX func-
tions are supported, the functions do not all map into specific protocol exchanges.

14.6 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS

Key Terms

end-to-end encryption          man-in-the-middle attack  public-key directory
key distribution               master key                X.509 certificate
key distribution center (KDC)  nonce
key management                 public-key certificate

                    Review Questions

                             14.1 Explain why man-in-the-middle attacks are ineffective on the secret key distribution
                                     protocol discussed in Figure 14.3.

                             14.2 What is the major issue in end to end key distribution? How does the key hierarchy
                                     concept address that issue?

                             14.3 What is a nonce?
                             14.4 What is a key distribution center?
                             14.5 What are two different uses of public-key cryptography related to key distribution?

Hiva-Network.Com
470 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

 14.6  List four general categories of schemes for the distribution of public keys.
 14.7  Discuss the potential security issues that arise due to public key directory based
       system.
 14.8  What is a public-key certificate?
 14.9  What are the requirements for the use of a public-key certificate scheme?
14.10  What is the purpose of the X.509 standard?
14.11  What is a chain of certificates?
14.12  How is an X.509 certificate revoked?

Problems

 14.1 One local area network vendor provides a key distribution facility, as illustrated in
          Figure 14.18.
          a. Describe the scheme.
          b. Compare this scheme to that of Figure 14.3. What are the pros and cons?

 14.2 "We are under great pressure, Holmes." Detective Lestrade looked nervous. "We
          have learned that copies of sensitive government documents are stored in computers
          of one foreign embassy here in London. Normally these documents exist in electronic
          form only on a selected few government computers that satisfy the most stringent
          security requirements. However, sometimes they must be sent through the network
          connecting all government computers. But all messages in this network are encrypted
          using a top-secret encryption algorithm certified by our best crypto experts. Even the
          NSA and the KGB are unable to break it. And now these documents have appeared
          in hands of diplomats of a small, otherwise insignificant, country. And we have no
          idea how it could happen."

                  "But you do have some suspicion who did it, do you?" asked Holmes.

                  "Yes, we did some routine investigation. There is a man who has legal access
          to one of the government computers and has frequent contacts with diplomats from
          the embassy. But the computer he has access to is not one of the trusted ones where
          these documents are normally stored. He is the suspect, but we have no idea how he
          could obtain copies of the documents. Even if he could obtain a copy of an encrypted
          document, he couldn't decrypt it."

                                          Key
                                     Distribution
                                    Center (KDC)

(2) IDA, E(Ka, Na), IDB, E(Kb, Nb)

       (3) E(Kb, [Ks, IDA, Nb]), E(Ka, [Ks, IDB, Na])
                                         (1) IDA, E(Ka, Na)

B                                                                                A

                                                       (4) E(Ka, [Ks, IDB, Na])
Figure 14.18 Figure for Problem 14.1
                  14.6 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 471

                "Hmm, please describe the communication protocol used on the network."
        Holmes opened his eyes, thus proving that he had followed Lestrade's talk with an
        attention that contrasted with his sleepy look.

                "Well, the protocol is as follows. Each node N of the network has been assigned
        a unique secret key Kn. This key is used to secure communication between the node
        and a trusted server. That is, all the keys are stored also on the server. User A, wishing
        to send a secret message M to user B, initiates the following protocol:

       1. A generates a random number R and sends to the server his name A, destination
            B, and E(Ka, R).

       2. Server responds by sending E(Kb, R) to A.
       3. A sends E(R, M) together with E(Kb, R) to B.
       4. B knows Kb, thus decrypts E(Kb, R), to get R and will subsequently use R to

            decrypt E(R, M) to get M.

        You see that a random key is generated every time a message has to be sent. I admit
        the man could intercept messages sent between the top-secret trusted nodes, but I see
        no way he could decrypt them."

                "Well, I think you have your man, Lestrade. The protocol isn't secure because
        the server doesn't authenticate users who send him a request. Apparently designers
        of the protocol have believed that sending E(Kx, R) implicitly authenticates user X as
        the sender, as only X (and the server) knows Kx. But you know that E(Kx, R) can be
        intercepted and later replayed. Once you understand where the hole is, you will be
        able to obtain enough evidence by monitoring the man's use of the computer he has
        access to. Most likely he works as follows. After intercepting E(Ka, R) and E(R, M)
        (see steps 1 and 3 of the protocol), the man, let's denote him as Z, will continue by
        pretending to be A and . . .

                Finish the sentence for Holmes.
14.3 The 1988 version of X.509 lists properties that RSA keys must satisfy to be secure

        given current knowledge about the difficulty of factoring large numbers. The discus-
        sion concludes with a constraint on the public exponent and the modulus n:

                    It must be ensured that e 7 log2(n) to prevent attack by taking the eth
                    root mod n to disclose the plaintext.

        Although the constraint is correct, the reason given for requiring it is incorrect. What
        is wrong with the reason given and what is the correct reason?
14.4 Find at least one intermediate certification authority's certificate and one trusted
        root certification authority's certificate on your computer (e.g., in the browser). Print
        screenshots of both the general and details tab for each certificate.
14.5 NIST defines the term cryptoperiod as the time span during which a specific key is
        authorized for use or in which the keys for a given system or application may remain
        in effect. One document on key management uses the following time diagram for
        a shared secret key.

           Originator usage period

                                               Recipient usage period

                                             Cryptoperiod
472 CHAPTER 14 / KEY MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

       Explain the overlap by giving an example application in which the originator's usage
       period for the shared secret key begins before the recipient's usage period and also
       ends before the recipients usage period.

14.6 Consider the following protocol, designed to let A and B decide on a fresh, shared
        session key KA= B. We assume that they already share a long-term key KAB.
       1. A S B: A, NA.
       2. B S A: E(KAB, [NA, KA= B])
       3. A S B: E(KA= B, NA)
       a. We first try to understand the protocol designer's reasoning:
        --Why would A and B believe after the protocol ran that they share KA= B with the
           other party?

       --Why would they believe that this shared key is fresh?

       In both cases, you should explain both the reasons of both A and B, so your answer

       should complete the sentences
       A believes that she shares KA= B with B since . . .
                          hKeA= sBhiasrefrseKshA= sBinwcieth.
       B  believes  that                                       A   since  .  .  .
       A  believes  that                                       ..
       B believes that KA= B is fresh since . . .
       b. Assume now that A starts a run of this protocol with B. However, the connection

       is intercepted by the adversary C. Show how C can start a new run of the protocol

       using reflection, causing A to believe that she has agreed on a fresh key with B (in

       spite of the fact that she has only been communicating with C). Thus, in particular,

       the belief in (a) is false.

       c. Propose a modification of the protocol that prevents this attack.

14.7 What are the management functions of a PKI? What is a cross certificate?

14.8 State the significance of key pair recovery. When is the key pair updated?

Note: The remaining problems deal with the a cryptographic product developed by IBM,
which is briefly described in a document at box.com/Crypto7e (IBMCrypto.pdf). Try these
problems after reviewing the document.

14.9 What is the effect of adding the instruction EMKi
                                          EMKi: X S E(KMHi, X) i = 0, 1

14.10  Suppose N different systems use the IBM Cryptographic Subsystem with host master
14.11  keys KMH[i](i = 1, 2, c N). Devise a method for communicating between sys-
       tems without requiring the system to either share a common host master key or to
       divulge their individual host master keys. Hint: Each system needs three variants of
       its host master key.

       The principal objective of the IBM Cryptographic Subsystem is to protect transmis-
       sions between a terminal and the processing system. Devise a procedure, perhaps
       adding instructions, which will allow the processor to generate a session key KS and
       distribute it to Terminal i and Terminal j without having to store a key-equivalent
       variable in the host.
                            CHAPTER

User Authentication

          15.1 Remote User-Authentication Principles
                          The NIST Model for Electronic User Authentication
                          Means of Authentication
                          Mutual Authentication
                          One-Way Authentication

          15.2 Remote User-Authentication Using Symmetric Encryption
                          Mutual Authentication
                          One-Way Authentication

          15.3 Kerberos
                          Motivation
                          Kerberos Version 4
                          Kerberos Version 5

          15.4 Remote User-Authentication Using Asymmetric Encryption
                          Mutual Authentication
                          One-Way Authentication

          15.5 Federated Identity Management
                          Identity Management
                          Identity Federation

          15.6 Personal Identity Verification
                          PIV System Model
                          PIV Documentation
                          PIV Credentials and Keys
                          Authentication

          15.7 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                                                                               473
474 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                              LEARNING OBJECTIVES

            After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
             Understand the distinction between identification and verification.
             Present an overview of techniques for remote user authentication using

                 symmetric encryption.
             Give a presentation on Kerberos.
             Explain the differences between versions 4 and 5 of Kerberos.
             Describe the use of Kerberos in multiple realms.
             Present an overview of techniques for remote user authentication using

                 asymmetric encryption.
             Understand the need for a federated identity management system.
             Explain the use of PIV mechanisms as part of a user authentication system.

          This chapter examines some of the authentication functions that have been developed
          to support network-based user authentication. The chapter begins with an introduc-
          tion to some of the concepts and key considerations for user authentication over a
          network or the Internet. The next section examines user-authentication protocols that
          rely on symmetric encryption. This is followed by a section on one of the earliest and
          also one of the most widely used authentication services: Kerberos. Next, the chapter
          looks at user-authentication protocols that rely on asymmetric encryption. This is fol-
          lowed by a discussion of the X.509 user-authentication protocol. Finally, the concept of
          federated identity is introduced.

  15.1 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES

          In most computer security contexts, user authentication is the fundamental build-
          ing block and the primary line of defense. User authentication is the basis for most
          types of access control and for user accountability. RFC 4949 (Internet Security
          Glossary) defines user authentication as the process of verifying an identity claimed
          by or for a system entity. This process consists of two steps:

              Identification step: Presenting an identifier to the security system. (Identifiers
                  should be assigned carefully, because authenticated identities are the basis for
                  other security services, such as access control service.)

              Verification step: Presenting or generating authentication information that
                  corroborates the binding between the entity and the identifier.

                  For example, user Alice Toklas could have the user identifier ABTOKLAS.
          This information needs to be stored on any server or computer system that Alice
          wishes to use and could be known to system administrators and other users.
                       15.1 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES 475

A typical item of authentication information associated with this user ID is a pass-
word, which is kept secret (known only to Alice and to the system). If no one is
able to obtain or guess Alice's password, then the combination of Alice's user ID
and password enables administrators to set up Alice's access permissions and audit
her activity. Because Alice's ID is not secret, system users can send her email, but
because her password is secret, no one can pretend to be Alice.

       In essence, identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed
identity to the system; user authentication is the means of establishing the validity
of the claim. Note that user authentication is distinct from message authentication.
As defined in Chapter 12, message authentication is a procedure that allows com-
municating parties to verify that the contents of a received message have not been
altered and that the source is authentic. This chapter is concerned solely with user
authentication.

The NIST Model for Electronic User Authentication

NIST SP 800-63-2 (Electronic Authentication Guideline, August 2013) defines elec-
tronic user authentication as the process of establishing confidence in user identi-
ties that are presented electronically to an information system. Systems can use the
authenticated identity to determine if the authenticated individual is authorized to
perform particular functions, such as database transactions or access to system re-
sources. In many cases, the authentication and transaction or other authorized function
takes place across an open network such as the Internet. Equally authentication and
subsequent authorization can take place locally, such as across a local area network.

       SP 800-63-2 defines a general model for user authentication that involves a num-
ber of entities and procedures. We discuss this model with reference to Figure 15.1.

       The initial requirement for performing user authentication is that the user
must be registered with the system. The following is a typical sequence for registra-
tion. An applicant applies to a registration authority (RA) to become a subscriber

Registration, credential issuance,
          and maintenance

 Registration   Identity proofing                      Subscriber/  Authenticated session    Relying
authority (RA)  User registration                       claimant                           party (RP)

Registration    TRoekgeisnt,rcarteiodne/nitsisaulance               AuthEexncthicaantgeed       Authenticated
Confirmation                                                                                          assertion

                                                                                           protocol

Credential                                                          Token/credential
                                                                       Validation
service                                                                                    Verifier

provider (RA)

                                                                    E-Authentication using
                                                                     token and credential

Figure 15.1 The NIST SP 800-63-2 E-Authentication Architectural Model
476 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

          of a credential service provider (CSP). In this model, the RA is a trusted entity that
          establishes and vouches for the identity of an applicant to a CSP. The CSP then
          engages in an exchange with the subscriber. Depending on the details of the over-
          all authentication system, the CSP issues some sort of electronic credential to the
          subscriber. The credential is a data structure that authoritatively binds an identity
          and additional attributes to a token possessed by a subscriber, and can be verified
          when presented to the verifier in an authentication transaction. The token could
          be an encryption key or an encrypted password that identifies the subscriber. The
          token may be issued by the CSP, generated directly by the subscriber, or provided
          by a third party. The token and credential may be used in subsequent authentica-
          tion events.

                  Once a user is registered as a subscriber, the actual authentication process can
          take place between the subscriber and one or more systems that perform authen-
          tication and, subsequently, authorization. The party to be authenticated is called a
          claimant and the party verifying that identity is called a verifier. When a claimant
          successfully demonstrates possession and control of a token to a verifier through an
          authentication protocol, the verifier can verify that the claimant is the subscriber
          named in the corresponding credential. The verifier passes on an assertion about the
          identity of the subscriber to the relying party (RP). That assertion includes identity
          information about a subscriber, such as the subscriber name, an identifier assigned
          at registration, or other subscriber attributes that were verified in the registration
          process. The RP can use the authenticated information provided by the verifier to
          make access control or authorization decisions.

                  An implemented system for authentication will differ from or be more com-
          plex than this simplified model, but the model illustrates the key roles and functions
          needed for a secure authentication system.

         Means of Authentication

          There are four general means of authenticating a user's identity, which can be used
          alone or in combination:

              Something the individual knows: Examples include a password, a personal
                  identification number (PIN), or answers to a prearranged set of questions.

              Something the individual possesses: Examples include cryptographic keys,
                  electronic keycards, smart cards, and physical keys. This type of authenticator
                  is referred to as a token.

              Something the individual is (static biometrics): Examples include recognition
                  by fingerprint, retina, and face.

              Something the individual does (dynamic biometrics): Examples include recog-
                  nition by voice pattern, handwriting characteristics, and typing rhythm.

                  All of these methods, properly implemented and used, can provide secure
          user authentication. However, each method has problems. An adversary may be
          able to guess or steal a password. Similarly, an adversary may be able to forge or
          steal a token. A user may forget a password or lose a token. Furthermore, there is a
          significant administrative overhead for managing password and token information
          on systems and securing such information on systems. With respect to biometric
                       15.1 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION PRINCIPLES 477

authenticators, there are a variety of problems, including dealing with false positives
and false negatives, user acceptance, cost, and convenience. For network-based user
authentication, the most important methods involve cryptographic keys and some-
thing the individual knows, such as a password.

Mutual Authentication

An important application area is that of mutual authentication protocols. Such pro-
tocols enable communicating parties to satisfy themselves mutually about each oth-
er's identity and to exchange session keys. This topic was examined in Chapter 14.
There, the focus was key distribution. We return to this topic here to consider the
wider implications of authentication.

       Central to the problem of authenticated key exchange are two issues: confi-
dentiality and timeliness. To prevent masquerade and to prevent compromise of
session keys, essential identification and session-key information must be commu-
nicated in encrypted form. This requires the prior existence of secret or public keys
that can be used for this purpose. The second issue, timeliness, is important because
of the threat of message replays. Such replays, at worst, could allow an opponent to
compromise a session key or successfully impersonate another party. At minimum,
a successful replay can disrupt operations by presenting parties with messages that
appear genuine but are not.

       [GONG93] lists the following examples of replay attacks:

   1. The simplest replay attack is one in which the opponent simply copies a mes-
       sage and replays it later.

   2. An opponent can replay a timestamped message within the valid time window.
       If both the original and the replay arrive within then time window, this inci-
       dent can be logged.

   3. As with example (2), an opponent can replay a timestamped message within
       the valid time window, but in addition, the opponent suppresses the original
       message. Thus, the repetition cannot be detected.

   4. Another attack involves a backward replay without modification. This is a re-
       play back to the message sender. This attack is possible if symmetric encryp-
       tion is used and the sender cannot easily recognize the difference between
       messages sent and messages received on the basis of content.

       One approach to coping with replay attacks is to attach a sequence number to
each message used in an authentication exchange. A new message is accepted only
if its sequence number is in the proper order. The difficulty with this approach is
that it requires each party to keep track of the last sequence number for each claim-
ant it has dealt with. Because of this overhead, sequence numbers are generally not
used for authentication and key exchange. Instead, one of the following two general
approaches is used:

    Timestamps: Party A accepts a message as fresh only if the message contains
       a timestamp that, in A's judgment, is close enough to A's knowledge of cur-
       rent time. This approach requires that clocks among the various participants
       be synchronized.
           478 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                             Challenge/response: Party A, expecting a fresh message from B, first sends B
                                a nonce (challenge) and requires that the subsequent message (response) re-
                                ceived from B contain the correct nonce value.

                                It can be argued (e.g., [LAM92a]) that the timestamp approach should not be
                         used for connection-oriented applications because of the inherent difficulties with
                         this technique. First, some sort of protocol is needed to maintain synchronization
                         among the various processor clocks. This protocol must be both fault tolerant, to
                         cope with network errors, and secure, to cope with hostile attacks. Second, the oppor-
                         tunity for a successful attack will arise if there is a temporary loss of synchronization
                         resulting from a fault in the clock mechanism of one of the parties. Finally, because
                         of the variable and unpredictable nature of network delays, distributed clocks cannot
                         be expected to maintain precise synchronization. Therefore, any timestamp-based
                         procedure must allow for a window of time sufficiently large to accommodate net-
                         work delays yet sufficiently small to minimize the opportunity for attack.

                                On the other hand, the challenge-response approach is unsuitable for a con-
                         nectionless type of application, because it requires the overhead of a handshake be-
                         fore any connectionless transmission, effectively negating the chief characteristic of
                         a connectionless transaction. For such applications, reliance on some sort of secure
                         time server and a consistent attempt by each party to keep its clocks in synchroniza-
                         tion may be the best approach (e.g., [LAM92b]).

                    One-Way Authentication

                         One application for which encryption is growing in popularity is electronic mail
                         (email). The very nature of electronic mail, and its chief benefit, is that it is not nec-
                         essary for the sender and receiver to be online at the same time. Instead, the email
                         message is forwarded to the receiver's electronic mailbox, where it is buffered until
                         the receiver is available to read it.

                                The "envelope" or header of the email message must be in the clear, so that
                         the message can be handled by the store-and-forward email protocol, such as the
                         Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) or X.400. However, it is often desirable that
                         the mail-handling protocol not require access to the plaintext form of the message,
                         because that would require trusting the mail-handling mechanism. Accordingly, the
                         email message should be encrypted such that the mail-handling system is not in
                         possession of the decryption key.

                                A second requirement is that of authentication. Typically, the recipient wants
                         some assurance that the message is from the alleged sender.

             15.2 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING
                   SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION

                    Mutual Authentication

                         As was discussed in Chapter 14, a two-level hierarchy of symmetric encryption keys
                         can be used to provide confidentiality for communication in a distributed environ-
                         ment. In general, this strategy involves the use of a trusted key distribution center

Hiva-Network.Com
15.2 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 479

(KDC). Each party in the network shares a secret key, known as a master key, with
the KDC. The KDC is responsible for generating keys to be used for a short time
over a connection between two parties, known as session keys, and for distribut-
ing those keys using the master keys to protect the distribution. This approach is
quite common. As an example, we look at the Kerberos system in Section 15.3.
The discussion in this subsection is relevant to an understanding of the Kerberos
mechanisms.

       Figure 14.3 illustrates a proposal initially put forth by Needham and Schroeder
[NEED78] for secret key distribution using a KDC that, as was mentioned in
Chapter 14, includes authentication features. The protocol can be summarized as
follows.1

1. A S KDC:  IDA } IDB } N1
2. KDC S A:  E(Ka, [Ks } IDB } N1 } E(Kb, [Ks } IDA])])
3. A S B:    E(Kb, [Ks } IDA])
4. B S A:    E(Ks, N2)
5. A S B:    E(Ks, f(N2)) where f() is a generic function that modifies the
             value of the nonce.

       Secret keys Ka and Kb are shared between A and the KDC and B and the
KDC, respectively. The purpose of the protocol is to distribute securely a session
key Ks to A and B. Entity A securely acquires a new session key in step 2. The mes-
sage in step 3 can be decrypted, and hence understood, only by B. Step 4 reflects B's
knowledge of Ks, and step 5 assures B of A's knowledge of Ks and assures B that this
is a fresh message because of the use of the nonce N2. Recall from our discussion in
Chapter 14 that the purpose of steps 4 and 5 is to prevent a certain type of replay at-
tack. In particular, if an opponent is able to capture the message in step 3 and replay
it, this might in some fashion disrupt operations at B.

       Despite the handshake of steps 4 and 5, the protocol is still vulnerable to a
form of replay attack. Suppose that an opponent, X, has been able to compromise
an old session key. Admittedly, this is a much more unlikely occurrence than that
an opponent has simply observed and recorded step 3. Nevertheless, it is a potential
security risk. X can impersonate A and trick B into using the old key by simply re-
playing step 3. Unless B remembers indefinitely all previous session keys used with
A, B will be unable to determine that this is a replay. If X can intercept the hand-
shake message in step 4, then it can impersonate A's response in step 5. From this
point on, X can send bogus messages to B that appear to B to come from A using an
authenticated session key.

       Denning [DENN81, DENN82] proposes to overcome this weakness by a
modification to the Needham/Schroeder protocol that includes the addition of a
timestamp to steps 2 and 3. Her proposal assumes that the master keys, Ka and Kb,
are secure, and it consists of the following steps.

1The portion to the left of the colon indicates the sender and the receiver; the portion to the right indi-
cates the contents of the message; the symbol } indicates concatenation.
480 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

1. A S KDC:  IDA } IDB
2. KDC S A:  E(Ka, [Ks } IDB } T } E(Kb, [Ks } IDA } T])])
3. A S B:    E(Kb, [Ks } IDA } T])
4. B S A:    E(Ks, N1)
5. A S B:    E(Ks, f(N1))

       T is a timestamp that assures A and B that the session key has only just been
generated. Thus, both A and B know that the key distribution is a fresh exchange.
A and B can verify timeliness by checking that

              Clock - T  6 t1 + t2

where t1 is the estimated normal discrepancy between the KDC's clock and the
local clock (at A or B) and t2 is the expected network delay time. Each node can
set its clock against some standard reference source. Because the timestamp T is
encrypted using the secure master keys, an opponent, even with knowledge of an
old session key, cannot succeed because a replay of step 3 will be detected by B as
untimely.

       A final point: Steps 4 and 5 were not included in the original presentation
[DENN81] but were added later [DENN82]. These steps confirm the receipt of the
session key at B.

       The Denning protocol seems to provide an increased degree of security com-
pared to the Needham/Schroeder protocol. However, a new concern is raised:
namely, that this new scheme requires reliance on clocks that are synchronized
throughout the network. [GONG92] points out a risk involved. The risk is based
on the fact that the distributed clocks can become unsynchronized as a result of
sabotage on or faults in the clocks or the synchronization mechanism.2 The problem
occurs when a sender's clock is ahead of the intended recipient's clock. In this case,
an opponent can intercept a message from the sender and replay it later when the
timestamp in the message becomes current at the recipient's site. This replay could
cause unexpected results. Gong refers to such attacks as suppress-replay attacks.

       One way to counter suppress-replay attacks is to enforce the requirement that
parties regularly check their clocks against the KDC's clock. The other alternative,
which avoids the need for clock synchronization, is to rely on handshaking protocols
using nonces. This latter alternative is not vulnerable to a suppress-replay attack,
because the nonces the recipient will choose in the future are unpredictable to the
sender. The Needham/Schroeder protocol relies on nonces only but, as we have
seen, has other vulnerabilities.

       In [KEHN92], an attempt is made to respond to the concerns about suppress-
replay attacks and at the same time fix the problems in the Needham/Schroeder
protocol. Subsequently, an inconsistency in this latter protocol was noted and an
improved strategy was presented in [NEUM93a].3 The protocol is

2Such things can and do happen. In recent years, flawed chips were used in a number of computers and other
electronic systems to track the time and date. The chips had a tendency to skip forward one day. [NEUM90]
3It really is hard to get these things right.
15.2 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 481

1. A S B:    IDA } Na
2. B S KDC:  IDB } Nb } E(Kb, [IDA } Na } Tb])
3. KDC S A:  E(Ka, [IDB } Na } Ks } Tb]) } E(Kb, [IDA } Ks } Tb]) } Nb
4. A S B:    E(Kb, [IDA } Ks } Tb]) } E(Ks, Nb)

Let us follow this exchange step by step.

1. A initiates the authentication exchange by generating a nonce, Na, and sending
   that plus its identifier to B in plaintext. This nonce will be returned to A in an
   encrypted message that includes the session key, assuring A of its timeliness.

2. B alerts the KDC that a session key is needed. Its message to the KDC in-
   cludes its identifier and a nonce, Nb. This nonce will be returned to B in an
   encrypted message that includes the session key, assuring B of its timeliness.
   B's message to the KDC also includes a block encrypted with the secret key
   shared by B and the KDC. This block is used to instruct the KDC to issue
   credentials to A; the block specifies the intended recipient of the credentials, a
   suggested expiration time for the credentials, and the nonce received from A.

3. The KDC passes on to A B's nonce and a block encrypted with the secret key
   that B shares with the KDC. The block serves as a "ticket" that can be used
   by A for subsequent authentications, as will be seen. The KDC also sends to
   A a block encrypted with the secret key shared by A and the KDC. This block
   verifies that B has received A's initial message (IDB) and that this is a timely
   message and not a replay (Na), and it provides A with a session key (Ks) and
   the time limit on its use (Tb).

4. A transmits the ticket to B, together with the B's nonce, the latter encrypted
   with the session key. The ticket provides B with the secret key that is used to de-
   crypt E(Ks, Nb) to recover the nonce. The fact that B's nonce is encrypted with
   the session key authenticates that the message came from A and is not a replay.

       This protocol provides an effective, secure means for A and B to establish a
session with a secure session key. Furthermore, the protocol leaves A in posses-
sion of a key that can be used for subsequent authentication to B, avoiding the
need to contact the authentication server repeatedly. Suppose that A and B estab-
lish a session using the aforementioned protocol and then conclude that session.
Subsequently, but within the time limit established by the protocol, A desires a new
session with B. The following protocol ensues:

1. A S B:  E(Kb, [IDA } Ks } Tb]) } Na=
2. B S A:  Nb= } E(Ks, Na= )
3. A S B:
           E(Ks, Nb= )

When B receives the message in step 1, it verifies that the ticket has not expired.
The newly generated nonces Na= and Nb= assure each party that there is no replay
attack.

       In all the foregoing, the time specified in Tb is a time relative to B's clock.
Thus, this timestamp does not require synchronized clocks, because B checks only

self-generated timestamps.
482 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

One-Way Authentication

Using symmetric encryption, the decentralized key distribution scenario illustrated
in Figure 14.5 is impractical. This scheme requires the sender to issue a request to
the intended recipient, await a response that includes a session key, and only then
send the message.

       With some refinement, the KDC strategy illustrated in Figure 14.3 is a can-
didate for encrypted electronic mail. Because we wish to avoid requiring that the
recipient (B) be on line at the same time as the sender (A), steps 4 and 5 must be
eliminated. For a message with content M, the sequence is as follows:

1. A S KDC:  IDA } IDB } N1
2. KDC S A:  E(Ka, [Ks } IDB } N1 } E(Kb, [Ks } IDA])])
3. A S B:    E(Kb, [Ks } IDA]) } E(Ks, M)

This approach guarantees that only the intended recipient of a message will be
able to read it. It also provides a level of authentication that the sender is A. As
specified, the protocol does not protect against replays. Some measure of defense
could be provided by including a timestamp with the message. However, because
of the potential delays in the email process, such timestamps may have limited
usefulness.

15.3 KERBEROS

        Kerberos4 is an authentication service developed as part of Project Athena at MIT.
        The problem that Kerberos addresses is this: Assume an open distributed environ-
        ment in which users at workstations wish to access services on servers distributed
        throughout the network. We would like for servers to be able to restrict access to
        authorized users and to be able to authenticate requests for service. In this envi-
        ronment, a workstation cannot be trusted to identify its users correctly to network
        services. In particular, the following three threats exist:

           1. A user may gain access to a particular workstation and pretend to be another
               user operating from that workstation.

           2. A user may alter the network address of a workstation so that the requests
               sent from the altered workstation appear to come from the impersonated
               workstation.

           3. A user may eavesdrop on exchanges and use a replay attack to gain entrance
               to a server or to disrupt operations.

        In any of these cases, an unauthorized user may be able to gain access to services
        and data that he or she is not authorized to access. Rather than building in elaborate

4"In Greek mythology, a many headed dog, commonly three, perhaps with a serpent's tail, the guardian
of the entrance of Hades." From Dictionary of Subjects and Symbols in Art, by James Hall, Harper &
Row, 1979. Just as the Greek Kerberos has three heads, the modern Kerberos was intended to have three
components to guard a network's gate: authentication, accounting, and audit. The last two heads were
never implemented.
                                                                15.3 / KERBEROS 483

authentication protocols at each server, Kerberos provides a centralized authenti-
cation server whose function is to authenticate users to servers and servers to users.
Unlike most other authentication schemes described in this book, Kerberos relies
exclusively on symmetric encryption, making no use of public-key encryption.

       Two versions of Kerberos are in common use. Version 4 [MILL88, STEI88]
implementations still exist. Version 5 [KOHL94] corrects some of the security defi-
ciencies of version 4 and has been issued as a proposed Internet Standard (RFC
4120 and RFC 4121).5

       We begin this section with a brief discussion of the motivation for the Kerberos
approach. Then, because of the complexity of Kerberos, it is best to start with a de-
scription of the authentication protocol used in version 4. This enables us to see the
essence of the Kerberos strategy without considering some of the details required to
handle subtle security threats. Finally, we examine version 5.

Motivation

If a set of users is provided with dedicated personal computers that have no network
connections, then a user's resources and files can be protected by physically secur-
ing each personal computer. When these users instead are served by a centralized
time-sharing system, the time-sharing operating system must provide the security.
The operating system can enforce access-control policies based on user identity and
use the logon procedure to identify users.

       Today, neither of these scenarios is typical. More common is a distributed
architecture consisting of dedicated user workstations (clients) and distributed
or centralized servers. In this environment, three approaches to security can be
envisioned.

   1. Rely on each individual client workstation to assure the identity of its user or
       users and rely on each server to enforce a security policy based on user iden-
       tification (ID).

   2. Require that client systems authenticate themselves to servers, but trust the
       client system concerning the identity of its user.

   3. Require the user to prove his or her identity for each service invoked. Also
       require that servers prove their identity to clients.

       In a small, closed environment in which all systems are owned and operated
by a single organization, the first or perhaps the second strategy may suffice.6 But
in a more open environment in which network connections to other machines are
supported, the third approach is needed to protect user information and resources
housed at the server. Kerberos supports this third approach. Kerberos assumes a
distributed client/server architecture and employs one or more Kerberos servers to
provide an authentication service.

5Versions 1 through 3 were internal development versions. Version 4 is the "original" Kerberos.
6However, even a closed environment faces the threat of attack by a disgruntled employee.
484 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                  The first published report on Kerberos [STEI88] listed the following
          requirements.

              Secure: A network eavesdropper should not be able to obtain the necessary
                  information to impersonate a user. More generally, Kerberos should be strong
                  enough that a potential opponent does not find it to be the weak link.

              Reliable: For all services that rely on Kerberos for access control, lack of
                  availability of the Kerberos service means lack of availability of the supported
                  services. Hence, Kerberos should be highly reliable and should employ a
                  distributed server architecture with one system able to back up another.

              Transparent: Ideally, the user should not be aware that authentication is taking
                  place beyond the requirement to enter a password.

              Scalable: The system should be capable of supporting large numbers of clients
                  and servers. This suggests a modular, distributed architecture.

                  To support these requirements, the overall scheme of Kerberos is that of a
          trusted third-party authentication service that uses a protocol based on that pro-
          posed by Needham and Schroeder [NEED78], which was discussed in Section 15.2.
          It is trusted in the sense that clients and servers trust Kerberos to mediate their
          mutual authentication. Assuming the Kerberos protocol is well designed, then the
          authentication service is secure if the Kerberos server itself is secure.7

         Kerberos Version 4

          Version 4 of Kerberos makes use of DES, in a rather elaborate protocol, to pro-
          vide the authentication service. Viewing the protocol as a whole, it is difficult to see
          the need for the many elements contained therein. Therefore, we adopt a strategy
          used by Bill Bryant of Project Athena [BRYA88] and build up to the full protocol
          by looking first at several hypothetical dialogues. Each successive dialogue adds
          additional complexity to counter security vulnerabilities revealed in the preceding
          dialogue.

                  After examining the protocol, we look at some other aspects of version 4.

          A SIMPLE AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE In an unprotected network environment, any
          client can apply to any server for service. The obvious security risk is that of im-
          personation. An opponent can pretend to be another client and obtain unauthor-
          ized privileges on server machines. To counter this threat, servers must be able to
          confirm the identities of clients who request service. Each server can be required to
          undertake this task for each client/server interaction, but in an open environment,
          this places a substantial burden on each server.

             7Remember that the security of the Kerberos server should not automatically be assumed but must be
             guarded carefully (e.g., in a locked room). It is well to remember the fate of the Greek Kerberos, whom
             Hercules was ordered by Eurystheus to capture as his Twelfth Labor: "Hercules found the great dog on its
             chain and seized it by the throat. At once the three heads tried to attack, and Kerberos lashed about with
             his powerful tail. Hercules hung on grimly, and Kerberos relaxed into unconsciousness. Eurystheus may
             have been surprised to see Hercules alive--when he saw the three slavering heads and the huge dog they
             belonged to he was frightened out of his wits, and leapt back into the safety of his great bronze jar." From
             The Hamlyn Concise Dictionary of Greek and Roman Mythology, by Michael Stapleton, Hamlyn, 1982.
                                                 15.3 / KERBEROS 485

       An alternative is to use an authentication server (AS) that knows the
passwords of all users and stores these in a centralized database. In addition, the AS
shares a unique secret key with each server. These keys have been distributed physi-
cally or in some other secure manner. Consider the following hypothetical dialogue:

       (1) C S AS: IDC } PC } IDV

       (2) AS S C: Ticket

       (3) C S V:  IDC } Ticket

       Ticket = E(Kv, [IDC } ADC } IDV])

where

    C = client
  AS = authentication server

   V = server
 IDC = identifier of user on C
 IDV = identifier of V

  PC = password of user on C
ADC = network address of C

  Kv = secret encryption key shared by AS and V

In this scenario, the user logs on to a workstation and requests access to server V.
The client module C in the user's workstation requests the user's password and then
sends a message to the AS that includes the user's ID, the server's ID, and the user's
password. The AS checks its database to see if the user has supplied the proper
password for this user ID and whether this user is permitted access to server V. If
both tests are passed, the AS accepts the user as authentic and must now convince
the server that this user is authentic. To do so, the AS creates a ticket that con-
tains the user's ID and network address and the server's ID. This ticket is encrypted
using the secret key shared by the AS and this server. This ticket is then sent back
to C. Because the ticket is encrypted, it cannot be altered by C or by an opponent.

       With this ticket, C can now apply to V for service. C sends a message to V con-
taining C's ID and the ticket. V decrypts the ticket and verifies that the user ID in
the ticket is the same as the unencrypted user ID in the message. If these two match,
the server considers the user authenticated and grants the requested service.

       Each of the ingredients of message (3) is significant. The ticket is encrypted to
prevent alteration or forgery. The server's ID (IDV) is included in the ticket so that
the server can verify that it has decrypted the ticket properly. IDC is included in the
ticket to indicate that this ticket has been issued on behalf of C. Finally, ADC serves
to counter the following threat. An opponent could capture the ticket transmitted
in message (2), then use the name IDC and transmit a message of form (3) from
another workstation. The server would receive a valid ticket that matches the user
ID and grant access to the user on that other workstation. To prevent this attack,
the AS includes in the ticket the network address from which the original request
came. Now the ticket is valid only if it is transmitted from the same workstation that
initially requested the ticket.
486 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

A MORE SECURE AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Although the foregoing scenario solves
some of the problems of authentication in an open network environment, problems
remain. Two in particular stand out. First, we would like to minimize the number
of times that a user has to enter a password. Suppose each ticket can be used only
once. If user C logs on to a workstation in the morning and wishes to check his or her
mail at a mail server, C must supply a password to get a ticket for the mail server. If
C wishes to check the mail several times during the day, each attempt requires re-
entering the password. We can improve matters by saying that tickets are reusable.
For a single logon session, the workstation can store the mail server ticket after it is
received and use it on behalf of the user for multiple accesses to the mail server.

       However, under this scheme, it remains the case that a user would need a new
ticket for every different service. If a user wished to access a print server, a mail
server, a file server, and so on, the first instance of each access would require a new
ticket and hence require the user to enter the password.

       The second problem is that the earlier scenario involved a plaintext transmis-
sion of the password [message (1)]. An eavesdropper could capture the password
and use any service accessible to the victim.

       To solve these additional problems, we introduce a scheme for avoiding plain-
text passwords and a new server, known as the ticket-granting server (TGS). The
new (but still hypothetical) scenario is as follows.

Once per user logon session:

(1) C S AS:  IDC } IDtgs
(2) AS S C:  E(Kc, Tickettgs)

Once per type of service:

(3) C S TGS: IDC } IDV } Tickettgs
(4) TGS S C: Ticketv

Once per service session:

   (5) C S V: IDC } Ticketv
Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [IDC } ADC } IDtgs } TS1 } Lifetime1])
Ticketv = E(Kv, [IDC } ADC } IDv } TS2 } Lifetime2])

       The new service, TGS, issues tickets to users who have been authenticated to
AS. Thus, the user first requests a ticket-granting ticket (Tickettgs) from the AS. The
client module in the user workstation saves this ticket. Each time the user requires
access to a new service, the client applies to the TGS, using the ticket to authenti-
cate itself. The TGS then grants a ticket for the particular service. The client saves
each service-granting ticket and uses it to authenticate its user to a server each time
a particular service is requested. Let us look at the details of this scheme:

   1. The client requests a ticket-granting ticket on behalf of the user by sending its
       user's ID to the AS, together with the TGS ID, indicating a request to use the
       TGS service.
                                                                                     15.3 / KERBEROS 487

                            2. The AS responds with a ticket that is encrypted with a key that is derived from
                                the user's password (Kc), which is already stored at the AS. When this response
                                arrives at the client, the client prompts the user for his or her password, gen-
                                erates the key, and attempts to decrypt the incoming message. If the correct
                                password is supplied, the ticket is successfully recovered.

                                Because only the correct user should know the password, only the correct user
                         can recover the ticket. Thus, we have used the password to obtain credentials from
                         Kerberos without having to transmit the password in plaintext. The ticket itself
                         consists of the ID and network address of the user, and the ID of the TGS. This
                         corresponds to the first scenario. The idea is that the client can use this ticket to
                         request multiple service-granting tickets. So the ticket-granting ticket is to be reus-
                         able. However, we do not wish an opponent to be able to capture the ticket and use
                         it. Consider the following scenario: An opponent captures the login ticket and waits
                         until the user has logged off his or her workstation. Then the opponent either gains
                         access to that workstation or configures his workstation with the same network ad-
                         dress as that of the victim. The opponent would be able to reuse the ticket to spoof
                         the TGS. To counter this, the ticket includes a timestamp, indicating the date and
                         time at which the ticket was issued, and a lifetime, indicating the length of time for
                         which the ticket is valid (e.g., eight hours). Thus, the client now has a reusable ticket
                         and need not bother the user for a password for each new service request. Finally,
                         note that the ticket-granting ticket is encrypted with a secret key known only to the
                         AS and the TGS. This prevents alteration of the ticket. The ticket is reencrypted
                         with a key based on the user's password. This assures that the ticket can be recov-
                         ered only by the correct user, providing the authentication.

                                Now that the client has a ticket-granting ticket, access to any server can be
                         obtained with steps 3 and 4.

                            3. The client requests a service-granting ticket on behalf of the user. For this pur-
                                pose, the client transmits a message to the TGS containing the user's ID, the
                                ID of the desired service, and the ticket-granting ticket.

                            4. The TGS decrypts the incoming ticket using a key shared only by the AS and
                                the TGS (Ktgs) and verifies the success of the decryption by the presence of its
                                ID. It checks to make sure that the lifetime has not expired. Then it compares
                                the user ID and network address with the incoming information to authenti-
                                cate the user. If the user is permitted access to the server V, the TGS issues a
                                ticket to grant access to the requested service.

                                The service-granting ticket has the same structure as the ticket-granting ticket.
                         Indeed, because the TGS is a server, we would expect that the same elements are
                         needed to authenticate a client to the TGS and to authenticate a client to an appli-
                         cation server. Again, the ticket contains a timestamp and lifetime. If the user wants
                         access to the same service at a later time, the client can simply use the previously
                         acquired service-granting ticket and need not bother the user for a password. Note
                         that the ticket is encrypted with a secret key (Kv) known only to the TGS and the
                         server, preventing alteration.

                                Finally, with a particular service-granting ticket, the client can gain access to
                         the corresponding service with step 5.

Hiva-Network.Com
488 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

              5. The client requests access to a service on behalf of the user. For this purpose, the
                  client transmits a message to the server containing the user's ID and the service-
                  granting ticket. The server authenticates by using the contents of the ticket.

                  This new scenario satisfies the two requirements of only one password query
          per user session and protection of the user password.

          THE VERSION 4 AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Although the foregoing scenario en-
          hances security compared to the first attempt, two additional problems remain. The
          heart of the first problem is the lifetime associated with the ticket-granting ticket.
          If this lifetime is very short (e.g., minutes), then the user will be repeatedly asked
          for a password. If the lifetime is long (e.g., hours), then an opponent has a greater
          opportunity for replay. An opponent could eavesdrop on the network and capture
          a copy of the ticket-granting ticket and then wait for the legitimate user to log out.
          Then the opponent could forge the legitimate user's network address and send the
          message of step (3) to the TGS. This would give the opponent unlimited access to
          the resources and files available to the legitimate user.

                  Similarly, if an opponent captures a service-granting ticket and uses it before it
          expires, the opponent has access to the corresponding service.

                  Thus, we arrive at an additional requirement. A network service (the TGS or
          an application service) must be able to prove that the person using a ticket is the
          same person to whom that ticket was issued.

                  The second problem is that there may be a requirement for servers to authen-
          ticate themselves to users. Without such authentication, an opponent could sabo-
          tage the configuration so that messages to a server were directed to another loca-
          tion. The false server would then be in a position to act as a real server and capture
          any information from the user and deny the true service to the user.

                  We examine these problems in turn and refer to Table 15.1, which shows the
          actual Kerberos protocol. Figure 15.2 provides a simplified overview.

            Table 15.1 Summary of Kerberos Version 4 Message Exchanges

                (1) C S AS IDc } IDtgs } TS1
                (2) AS S C E(Kc, [Kc, tgs } IDtgs } TS2 } Lifetime2 } Tickettgs])

                                            Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Kc, tgs } IDC } ADC } IDtgs } TS2 } Lifetime2])

                                    (a) Authentication Service Exchange to obtain ticket-granting ticket

                (3) C S TGS IDv } Tickettgs } Authenticatorc
                (4) TGS S C E(Kc, tgs, [Kc, v } IDv } TS4 } Ticketv])

                                            Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Kc, tgs } IDC } ADC } IDtgs } TS2 } Lifetime2])
                                               Ticketv = E(Kv, [Kc, v } IDC } ADC } IDv } TS4 } Lifetime4])
                                                       Authenticatorc = E(Kc, tgs, [IDC } ADC } TS3])

                                   (b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange to obtain service-granting ticket

                (5) C S V Ticketv } Authenticatorc
                (6) V S C E(Kc,v, [TS5 + 1]) (for mutual authentication)

                                               Ticketv = E(Kv, [Kc, v } IDC } ADC } IDv } TS4 } Lifetime4])
                                                       Authenticatorc = E(Kc, v, [IDC } ADC } TS5])

                                          (c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange to obtain service
                                                                                                           15.3 / KERBEROS 489

                   once per                                                     2. AS verifies user's access right in
                   user logon                                                   database, and creates ticket-granting ticket
                   session                                                      and session key. Results are encrypted
                                                                                using key derived from user's password.
1. User logs on to
workstation and                                                                                            Kerberos
requests service on host
                               regqrtauicnektsietrngtetgriq+catuknisceetektsis-ntestgisoetnrivckikceeeyt-  Authentication
                                     ticket + session key                                                       server

                                                                                                               Ticket-
                                                                                                               granting
                                                                                                            server (TGS)

3. Workstation prompts            once per                                                                 4. TGS decrypts ticket and
user for password to decrypt      type of service                                                          authenticator, verifies request,
                                                                                                           and then creates ticket for
incoming message, and then                                                                                 requested application server.

send ticket and                   request service                                                                   6. Host verifies that
authenticator that contains                                                                                         ticket and authenticator
user's name, network                                                                                                match, and then grants
address, and time to TGS.                                                                                           access to service. If
                                                                                                                    mutual authentication is
5. Workstation sends           soenrcveicpeesressionauptrhoevnidtiecasteorrver                                      required, server returns
                                                                                                                    an authenticator.
ticket and authenticator                                                           Host/
to host.                                                                        application

                                                                                server

Figure 15.2 Overview of Kerberos

       First, consider the problem of captured ticket-granting tickets and the need
to determine that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket
was issued. The threat is that an opponent will steal the ticket and use it before it
expires. To get around this problem, let us have the AS provide both the client and
the TGS with a secret piece of information in a secure manner. Then the client can
prove its identity to the TGS by revealing the secret information--again in a secure
manner. An efficient way of accomplishing this is to use an encryption key as the
secure information; this is referred to as a session key in Kerberos.

       Table 15.1a shows the technique for distributing the session key. As before,
the client sends a message to the AS requesting access to the TGS. The AS re-
sponds with a message, encrypted with a key derived from the user's password
(Kc), that contains the ticket. The encrypted message also contains a copy of the
session key, Kc,tgs, where the subscripts indicate that this is a session key for C and
TGS. Because this session key is inside the message encrypted with Kc, only the
user's client can read it. The same session key is included in the ticket, which can
be read only by the TGS. Thus, the session key has been securely delivered to both
C and the TGS.
490 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                  Note that several additional pieces of information have been added to this
          first phase of the dialogue. Message (1) includes a timestamp, so that the AS knows
          that the message is timely. Message (2) includes several elements of the ticket in a
          form accessible to C. This enables C to confirm that this ticket is for the TGS and to
          learn its expiration time.

                  Armed with the ticket and the session key, C is ready to approach the TGS.
          As before, C sends the TGS a message that includes the ticket plus the ID of the
          requested service [message (3) in Table 15.1b]. In addition, C transmits an authentica-
          tor, which includes the ID and address of C's user and a timestamp. Unlike the ticket,
          which is reusable, the authenticator is intended for use only once and has a very short
          lifetime. The TGS can decrypt the ticket with the key that it shares with the AS. This
          ticket indicates that user C has been provided with the session key Kc,tgs. In effect,
          the ticket says, "Anyone who uses Kc,tgs must be C." The TGS uses the session key to
          decrypt the authenticator. The TGS can then check the name and address from the
          authenticator with that of the ticket and with the network address of the incoming
          message. If all match, then the TGS is assured that the sender of the ticket is indeed
          the ticket's real owner. In effect, the authenticator says, "At time TS3, I hereby use
          Kc,tgs." Note that the ticket does not prove anyone's identity but is a way to distribute
          keys securely. It is the authenticator that proves the client's identity. Because the au-
          thenticator can be used only once and has a short lifetime, the threat of an opponent
          stealing both the ticket and the authenticator for presentation later is countered.

                  The reply from the TGS in message (4) follows the form of message (2). The
          message is encrypted with the session key shared by the TGS and C and includes
          a session key to be shared between C and the server V, the ID of V, and the time-
          stamp of the ticket. The ticket itself includes the same session key.

                  C now has a reusable service-granting ticket for V. When C presents this ticket,
          as shown in message (5), it also sends an authenticator. The server can decrypt the
          ticket, recover the session key, and decrypt the authenticator.

                  If mutual authentication is required, the server can reply as shown in message
          (6) of Table 15.1. The server returns the value of the timestamp from the authenti-
          cator, incremented by 1, and encrypted in the session key. C can decrypt this mes-
          sage to recover the incremented timestamp. Because the message was encrypted by
          the session key, C is assured that it could have been created only by V. The contents
          of the message assure C that this is not a replay of an old reply.

                  Finally, at the conclusion of this process, the client and server share a secret
          key. This key can be used to encrypt future messages between the two or to ex-
          change a new random session key for that purpose.

                  Figure 15.3 illustrates the Kerberos exchanges among the parties. Table 15.2
          summarizes the justification for each of the elements in the Kerberos protocol.

          KERBEROS REALMS AND MULTIPLE KERBERI A full-service Kerberos environment
          consisting of a Kerberos server, a number of clients, and a number of application
          servers requires the following:

              1. The Kerberos server must have the user ID and hashed passwords of all partic-
                  ipating users in its database. All users are registered with the Kerberos server.

              2. The Kerberos server must share a secret key with each server. All servers are
                  registered with the Kerberos server.
                                                                                    15.3 / KERBEROS 491

Client            Authentication  Ticket-granting                                   Service
                    server (AS)    server (TGS)                                     provider

              Client authentication
                IDc || IDtgs || TS1

             Shared key and ticket
          E(Kc, [Kc,tgs || IDtgs || TS2 ||

             Lifetime2 || Tickettgs])

                    Tickettgs, server ID, and client authentication
                            IDv || Tickettgs || Authenticatorc
                                  Shared key and ticket

                         E(Kc,tgs, [Kc,v || IDv || TS4 || Ticketv])

                                                 Ticketv and client authentication
                                                      Ticketv || Authenticatorc
                                                           Service granted
                                                          E(Kc,v, [TS5 + 1])

Figure 15.3 Kerberos Exchanges

Table 15.2 Rationale for the Elements of the Kerberos Version 4 Protocol

Message (1)       Client requests ticket-granting ticket.
  IDC             Tells AS identity of user from this client.
  IDtgs           Tells AS that user requests access to TGS.
  TS1             Allows AS to verify that client's clock is synchronized with that of AS.
                  AS returns ticket-granting ticket.
Message (2)       Encryption is based on user's password, enabling AS and client to verify password, and
  Kc              protecting contents of message (2).
                  Copy of session key accessible to client created by AS to permit secure exchange between
  Kc, tgs         client and TGS without requiring them to share a permanent key.
                  Confirms that this ticket is for the TGS.
  IDtgs           Informs client of time this ticket was issued.
  TS2             Informs client of the lifetime of this ticket.
  Lifetime2
  Tickettgs       Ticket to be used by client to access TGS.

                  (a) Authentication Service Exchange

Message (3)       Client requests service-granting ticket.
  IDV             Tells TGS that user requests access to server V.
  Tickettgs       Assures TGS that this user has been authenticated by AS.
  Authenticatorc  Generated by client to validate ticket.

                                                                                    (Continued)
492 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

Table 15.2 Continued

Message (4)       TGS returns service-granting ticket.
  Kc, tgs         Key shared only by C and TGS protects contents of message (4).
  Kc, v           Copy of session key accessible to client created by TGS to permit secure exchange between
                  client and server without requiring them to share a permanent key.
  IDV             Confirms that this ticket is for server V.
  TS4             Informs client of time this ticket was issued.
  TicketV         Ticket to be used by client to access server V.
  Tickettgs       Reusable so that user does not have to reenter password.
  Ktgs            Ticket is encrypted with key known only to AS and TGS, to prevent tampering.
  Kc, tgs         Copy of session key accessible to TGS used to decrypt authenticator, thereby authenticating
                  ticket.
  IDC             Indicates the rightful owner of this ticket.
  ADC             Prevents use of ticket from workstation other than one that initially requested the ticket.
  IDtgs           Assures server that it has decrypted ticket properly.
  TS2             Informs TGS of time this ticket was issued.
  Lifetime2       Prevents replay after ticket has expired.
  Authenticatorc  Assures TGS that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket was
                  issued has very short lifetime to prevent replay.
  Kc, tgs         Authenticator is encrypted with key known only to client and TGS, to prevent tampering.
  IDC             Must match ID in ticket to authenticate ticket.
  ADC             Must match address in ticket to authenticate ticket.
  TS3
                  Informs TGS of time this authenticator was generated.

                      (b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange

Message (5)       Client requests service.
  TicketV         Assures server that this user has been authenticated by AS.
  Authenticatorc  Generated by client to validate ticket.
                  Optional authentication of server to client.
Message (6)       Assures C that this message is from V.
  Kc, v           Assures C that this is not a replay of an old reply.
  TS5 + 1         Reusable so that client does not need to request a new ticket from TGS for each access to
  Ticketv         the same server.
                  Ticket is encrypted with key known only to TGS and server, to prevent tampering.
  Kv              Copy of session key accessible to client; used to decrypt authenticator, thereby authenticating
  Kc, v           ticket.
                  Indicates the rightful owner of this ticket.
  IDC             Prevents use of ticket from workstation other than one that initially requested the ticket.
  ADC             Assures server that it has decrypted ticket properly.
  IDV             Informs server of time this ticket was issued.
  TS4             Prevents replay after ticket has expired.
  Lifetime4       Assures server that the ticket presenter is the same as the client for whom the ticket was
  Authenticatorc  issued; has very short lifetime to prevent replay.
                  Authenticator is encrypted with key known only to client and server, to prevent tampering.
  Kc, v           Must match ID in ticket to authenticate ticket.
  IDC             Must match address in ticket to authenticate ticket.
  ADC
  TS5             Informs server of time this authenticator was generated.

                      (c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange
                 15.3 / KERBEROS 493

       Such an environment is referred to as a Kerberos realm. The concept of
realm can be explained as follows. A Kerberos realm is a set of managed nodes
that share the same Kerberos database. The Kerberos database resides on the
Kerberos master computer system, which should be kept in a physically secure
room. A read-only copy of the Kerberos database might also reside on other
Kerberos computer systems. However, all changes to the database must be
made on the master computer system. Changing or accessing the contents of a
Kerberos database requires the Kerberos master password. A related concept
is that of a Kerberos principal, which is a service or user that is known to the
Kerberos system. Each Kerberos principal is identified by its principal name.
Principal names consist of three parts: a service or user name, an instance name,
and a realm name.

       Networks of clients and servers under different administrative organizations
typically constitute different realms. That is, it generally is not practical or does
not conform to administrative policy to have users and servers in one administra-
tive domain registered with a Kerberos server elsewhere. However, users in one
realm may need access to servers in other realms, and some servers may be will-
ing to provide service to users from other realms, provided that those users are
authenticated.

       Kerberos provides a mechanism for supporting such interrealm authentication.
For two realms to support interrealm authentication, a third requirement is added:

3. The Kerberos server in each interoperating realm shares a secret key with the
   server in the other realm. The two Kerberos servers are registered with each
   other.

       The scheme requires that the Kerberos server in one realm trust the Kerberos
server in the other realm to authenticate its users. Furthermore, the participating
servers in the second realm must also be willing to trust the Kerberos server in the
first realm.

       With these ground rules in place, we can describe the mechanism as follows
(Figure 15.4): A user wishing service on a server in another realm needs a ticket for
that server. The user's client follows the usual procedures to gain access to the local
TGS and then requests a ticket-granting ticket for a remote TGS (TGS in another
realm). The client can then apply to the remote TGS for a service-granting ticket for
the desired server in the realm of the remote TGS.

       The details of the exchanges illustrated in Figure 15.4 are as follows (compare
Table 15.1).

(1) C S AS:      IDc } IDtgs } TS1
(2) AS S C:      E(Kc, [Kc, tgs } IDtgs } TS2 } Lifetime2 } Tickettgs])
(3) C S TGS:     IDtgsrem } Tickettgs } Authenticatorc
(4) TGS S C:     E(Kc,tgs, [Kc, tgsrem } IDtgsrem } TS4 } Tickettgsrem])
(5) C S TGSrem:  IDvrem } Tickettgsrem } Authenticatorc
(6) TGSrem S C:  E(Kc,tgsrem, [Kc, vrem } IDvrem } TS6 } Ticketvrem])
(7) C S Vrem:    Ticketvrem } Authenticatorc
494 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                                          Realm A

                           Client     Req2u.eTstictkicekt eftorfolor cloacl aTlGTSGS                  Kerberos
                                  1.
                                                                                                    Authentication
                                      3.  Request  ticket  for                                        server (AS)
                                                   TGS
                                                                remote                                 Ticket-
                                                                                                      granting
                                      4. Ticket for remote TGS                                      server (TGS)

7. Request remote service                 5.foRrerqeumeostt6et.iscTekrievctkeret for remote server

                                                                                                    Kerberos

                              Host/                                                                 Authentication
                           application                                                                server (AS)

                              server                                                                   Ticket-
                                                                                                      granting
                                                                                                    server (TGS)

                                                                Realm B

Figure 15.4 Request for Service in Another Realm

       The ticket presented to the remote server (Vrem) indicates the realm in which
the user was originally authenticated. The server chooses whether to honor the re-
mote request.

       One problem presented by the foregoing approach is that it does not scale well
to many realms. If there are N realms, then there must be N(N - 1)/2 secure key
exchanges so that each Kerberos realm can interoperate with all other Kerberos
realms.

Kerberos Version 5

Kerberos version 5 is specified in RFC 4120 and provides a number of improve-
ments over version 4 [KOHL94]. To begin, we provide an overview of the changes
from version 4 to version 5 and then look at the version 5 protocol.
                                                                15.3 / KERBEROS 495

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VERSIONS 4 AND 5 Version 5 is intended to address the limita-
tions of version 4 in two areas: environmental shortcomings and technical deficien-
cies. Let us briefly summarize the improvements in each area.8

       Kerberos version 4 was developed for use within the Project Athena environ-
ment and, accordingly, did not fully address the need to be of general purpose. This
led to the following environmental shortcomings.

   1. Encryption system dependence: Version 4 requires the use of DES. Export
       restriction on DES as well as doubts about the strength of DES were thus of
       concern. In version 5, ciphertext is tagged with an encryption-type identifier
       so that any encryption technique may be used. Encryption keys are tagged
       with a type and a length, allowing the same key to be used in different al-
       gorithms and allowing the specification of different variations on a given
       algorithm.

   2. Internet protocol dependence: Version 4 requires the use of Internet Protocol
       (IP) addresses. Other address types, such as the ISO network address, are not
       accommodated. Version 5 network addresses are tagged with type and length,
       allowing any network address type to be used.

   3. Message byte ordering: In version 4, the sender of a message employs a byte
       ordering of its own choosing and tags the message to indicate least signifi-
       cant byte in lowest address or most significant byte in lowest address. This
       techniques works but does not follow established conventions. In version
       5, all message structures are defined using Abstract Syntax Notation One
       (ASN.1) and Basic Encoding Rules (BER), which provide an unambiguous
       byte ordering.

   4. Ticket lifetime: Lifetime values in version 4 are encoded in an 8-bit quantity
       in units of five minutes. Thus, the maximum lifetime that can be expressed is
       28 * 5 = 1280 minutes (a little over 21 hours). This may be inadequate for
       some applications (e.g., a long-running simulation that requires valid Kerberos
       credentials throughout execution). In version 5, tickets include an explicit start
       time and end time, allowing tickets with arbitrary lifetimes.

   5. Authentication forwarding: Version 4 does not allow credentials issued to one
       client to be forwarded to some other host and used by some other client. This
       capability would enable a client to access a server and have that server access
       another server on behalf of the client. For example, a client issues a request to
       a print server that then accesses the client's file from a file server, using the cli-
       ent's credentials for access. Version 5 provides this capability.

   6. Interrealm authentication: In version 4, interoperability among N realms
       requires on the order of N2 Kerberos-to-Kerberos relationships, as described
       earlier. Version 5 supports a method that requires fewer relationships, as de-
       scribed shortly.

8The following discussion follows the presentation in [KOHL94].
           496 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                                Apart from these environmental limitations, there are technical deficiencies
                         in the version 4 protocol itself. Most of these deficiencies were documented in
                         [BELL90], and version 5 attempts to address these. The deficiencies are the
                         following.

                            1. Double encryption: Note in Table 15.1 [messages (2) and (4)] that tickets pro-
                                vided to clients are encrypted twice--once with the secret key of the target
                                server and then again with a secret key known to the client. The second en-
                                cryption is not necessary and is computationally wasteful.

                            2. PCBC encryption: Encryption in version 4 makes use of a nonstandard mode
                                of DES known as propagating cipher block chaining (PCBC).9 It has been
                                demonstrated that this mode is vulnerable to an attack involving the inter-
                                change of ciphertext blocks [KOHL89]. PCBC was intended to provide an in-
                                tegrity check as part of the encryption operation. Version 5 provides explicit
                                integrity mechanisms, allowing the standard CBC mode to be used for encryp-
                                tion. In particular, a checksum or hash code is attached to the message prior to
                                encryption using CBC.

                            3. Session keys: Each ticket includes a session key that is used by the client
                                to encrypt the authenticator sent to the service associated with that ticket.
                                In addition, the session key may subsequently be used by the client and the
                                server to protect messages passed during that session. However, because
                                the same ticket may be used repeatedly to gain service from a particular
                                server, there is the risk that an opponent will replay messages from an old
                                session to the client or the server. In version 5, it is possible for a client
                                and server to negotiate a subsession key, which is to be used only for that
                                one connection. A new access by the client would result in the use of a new
                                subsession key.

                            4. Password attacks: Both versions are vulnerable to a password attack. The mes-
                                sage from the AS to the client includes material encrypted with a key based
                                on the client's password.10 An opponent can capture this message and attempt
                                to decrypt it by trying various passwords. If the result of a test decryption is of
                                the proper form, then the opponent has discovered the client's password and
                                may subsequently use it to gain authentication credentials from Kerberos. This
                                is the same type of password attack described in Chapter 21, with the same
                                kinds of countermeasures being applicable. Version 5 does provide a mecha-
                                nism known as preauthentication, which should make password attacks more
                                difficult, but it does not prevent them.

                         THE VERSION 5 AUTHENTICATION DIALOGUE Table 15.3 summarizes the basic ver-
                         sion 5 dialogue. This is best explained by comparison with version 4 (Table 15.1).

                                First, consider the authentication service exchange. Message (1) is a client re-
                         quest for a ticket-granting ticket. As before, it includes the ID of the user and the TGS.
                         The following new elements are added:

                               9This is described in Appendix T.
                               10Appendix T describes the mapping of passwords to encryption keys.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                                                15.3 / KERBEROS 497

Table 15.3 Summary of Kerberos Version 5 Message Exchanges

  (1) C S AS Options } IDc } Realmc } IDtgs } Times } Nonce1
  (2) AS S C RealmC } IDC } Tickettgs } E(Kc, [Kc,tgs } Times } Nonce1 } Realmtgs } IDtgs])

                               Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Flags } Kc,tgs } Realmc } IDC } ADC } Times])

                       (a) Authentication Service Exchange to obtain ticket-granting ticket

  (3) C S TGS Options } IDv } Times } Nonce2 } Tickettgs } Authenticatorc
  (4) TGS S C Realmc } IDC } Ticketv } E(Kc,tgs, [Kc,v } Times } Nonce2 } Realmv } IDv])

                                Tickettgs = E(Ktgs, [Flags } Kc,tgs } Realmc } IDC } ADC } Times])
                                  Ticketv = E(Kv, [Flags } Kc,v } Realmc } IDC } ADC } Times])
                                         Authenticatorc = E(Kc,tgs, [IDC } Realmc } TS1])

                     (b) Ticket-Granting Service Exchange to obtain service-granting ticket

  (5) C S V Options } Ticketv } Authenticatorc
  (6) V S C EKc,v[TS2 } Subkey } Seq #]

                                 Ticketv = E(Kv, [Flag } Kc,v } Realmc } IDC } ADC } Times])
                               Authenticatorc = E(Kc,v, [IDC } Relamc } TS2 } Subkey } Seq #])

                            (c) Client/Server Authentication Exchange to obtain service

    Realm: Indicates realm of user
    Options: Used to request that certain flags be set in the returned ticket
    Times: Used by the client to request the following time settings in the ticket:

        --from: the desired start time for the requested ticket
        --till: the requested expiration time for the requested ticket
        --rtime: requested renew-till time
    Nonce: A random value to be repeated in message (2) to assure that the re-
       sponse is fresh and has not been replayed by an opponent

       Message (2) returns a ticket-granting ticket, identifying information for the
client, and a block encrypted using the encryption key based on the user's password.
This block includes the session key to be used between the client and the TGS,
times specified in message (1), the nonce from message (1), and TGS identifying
information. The ticket itself includes the session key, identifying information for
the client, the requested time values, and flags that reflect the status of this ticket
and the requested options. These flags introduce significant new functionality to
version 5. For now, we defer a discussion of these flags and concentrate on the over-
all structure of the version 5 protocol.

       Let us now compare the ticket-granting service exchange for versions
4 and 5. We see that message (3) for both versions includes an authenticator, a
ticket, and the name of the requested service. In addition, version 5 includes re-
quested times and options for the ticket and a nonce--all with functions similar
to those of message (1). The authenticator itself is essentially the same as the one
used in version 4.
498 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                  Message (4) has the same structure as message (2). It returns a ticket plus
          information needed by the client, with the information encrypted using the session
          key now shared by the client and the TGS.

                  Finally, for the client/server authentication exchange, several new features
          appear in version 5. In message (5), the client may request as an option that mutual
          authentication is required. The authenticator includes several new fields:

              Subkey: The client's choice for an encryption key to be used to protect this
                  specific application session. If this field is omitted, the session key from the
                  ticket (Kc,v) is used.

              Sequence number: An optional field that specifies the starting sequence num-
                  ber to be used by the server for messages sent to the client during this session.
                  Messages may be sequence numbered to detect replays.

                  If mutual authentication is required, the server responds with message (6).
          This message includes the timestamp from the authenticator. Note that in version 4,
          the timestamp was incremented by one. This is not necessary in version 5, because
          the nature of the format of messages is such that it is not possible for an oppo-
          nent to create message (6) without knowledge of the appropriate encryption keys.
          The subkey field, if present, overrides the subkey field, if present, in message (5).
          The optional sequence number field specifies the starting sequence number to be
          used by the client.

          TICKET FLAGS The flags field included in tickets in version 5 supports expanded
          functionality compared to that available in version 4. Table 15.4 summarizes the
          flags that may be included in a ticket.

Table 15.4 Kerberos Version 5 Flags

INITIAL       This ticket was issued using the AS protocol and not issued based on a
PRE-AUTHENT   ticket-granting ticket.
HW-AUTHENT
RENEWABLE     During initial authentication, the client was authenticated by the KDC
MAY-POSTDATE  before a ticket was issued.
POSTDATED
INVALID       The protocol employed for initial authentication required the use of hard-
PROXIABLE     ware expected to be possessed solely by the named client.
PROXY
FORWARDABLE   Tells TGS that this ticket can be used to obtain a replacement ticket that
FORWARDED     expires at a later date.

              Tells TGS that a postdated ticket may be issued based on this ticket-
              granting ticket.

              Indicates that this ticket has been postdated; the end server can check the
              authtime field to see when the original authentication occurred.

              This ticket is invalid and must be validated by the KDC before use.

              Tells TGS that a new service-granting ticket with a different network
              address may be issued based on the presented ticket.

              Indicates that this ticket is a proxy.

              Tells TGS that a new ticket-granting ticket with a different network
              address may be issued based on this ticket-granting ticket.

              Indicates that this ticket has either been forwarded or was issued based on
              authentication involving a forwarded ticket-granting ticket.
                                                                15.3 / KERBEROS 499

       The INITIAL flag indicates that this ticket was issued by the AS, not by the
TGS. When a client requests a service-granting ticket from the TGS, it presents a
ticket-granting ticket obtained from the AS. In version 4, this was the only way to
obtain a service-granting ticket. Version 5 provides the additional capability that
the client can get a service-granting ticket directly from the AS. The utility of this is
as follows: A server, such as a password-changing server, may wish to know that the
client's password was recently tested.

       The PRE-AUTHENT flag, if set, indicates that when the AS received the ini-
tial request [message (1)], it authenticated the client before issuing a ticket. The
exact form of this preauthentication is left unspecified. As an example, the MIT
implementation of version 5 has encrypted timestamp preauthentication, enabled
by default. When a user wants to get a ticket, it has to send to the AS a preauthen-
tication block containing a random confounder, a version number, and a timestamp
all encrypted in the client's password-based key. The AS decrypts the block and will
not send a ticket-granting ticket back unless the timestamp in the preauthentica-
tion block is within the allowable time skew (time interval to account for clock drift
and network delays). Another possibility is the use of a smart card that generates
continually changing passwords that are included in the preauthenticated messages.
The passwords generated by the card can be based on a user's password but be
transformed by the card so that, in effect, arbitrary passwords are used. This pre-
vents an attack based on easily guessed passwords. If a smart card or similar device
was used, this is indicated by the HW-AUTHENT flag.

       When a ticket has a long lifetime, there is the potential for it to be stolen and
used by an opponent for a considerable period. If a short lifetime is used to lessen
the threat, then overhead is involved in acquiring new tickets. In the case of a ticket-
granting ticket, the client would either have to store the user's secret key, which is
clearly risky, or repeatedly ask the user for a password. A compromise scheme is
the use of renewable tickets. A ticket with the RENEWABLE flag set includes two
expiration times: One for this specific ticket and one that is the latest permissible
value for an expiration time. A client can have the ticket renewed by presenting it
to the TGS with a requested new expiration time. If the new time is within the limit
of the latest permissible value, the TGS can issue a new ticket with a new session
time and a later specific expiration time. The advantage of this mechanism is that
the TGS may refuse to renew a ticket reported as stolen.

       A client may request that the AS provide a ticket-granting ticket with the
MAY-POSTDATE flag set. The client can then use this ticket to request a ticket
that is flagged as POSTDATED and INVALID from the TGS. Subsequently, the
client may submit the postdated ticket for validation. This scheme can be useful
for running a long batch job on a server that requires a ticket periodically. The
client can obtain a number of tickets for this session at once, with spread out time
values. All but the first ticket are initially invalid. When the execution reaches a
point in time when a new ticket is required, the client can get the appropriate ticket
validated. With this approach, the client does not have to repeatedly use its ticket-
granting ticket to obtain a service-granting ticket.

       In version 5, it is possible for a server to act as a proxy on behalf of a client, in
effect adopting the credentials and privileges of the client to request a service from
another server. If a client wishes to use this mechanism, it requests a ticket-granting
500 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

          ticket with the PROXIABLE flag set. When this ticket is presented to the TGS, the
          TGS is permitted to issue a service-granting ticket with a different network address;
          this latter ticket will have its PROXY flag set. An application receiving such a ticket
          may accept it or require additional authentication to provide an audit trail.11

                  The proxy concept is a limited case of the more powerful forwarding procedure.
          If a ticket is set with the FORWARDABLE flag, a TGS can issue to the requestor a
          ticket-granting ticket with a different network address and the FORWARDED flag
          set. This ticket then can be presented to a remote TGS. This capability allows a cli-
          ent to gain access to a server on another realm without requiring that each Kerberos
          maintain a secret key with Kerberos servers in every other realm. For example,
          realms could be structured hierarchically. Then a client could walk up the tree to a
          common node and then back down to reach a target realm. Each step of the walk
          would involve forwarding a ticket-granting ticket to the next TGS in the path.

15.4 REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING
      ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION

Mutual Authentication

In Chapter 14, we presented one approach to the use of public-key encryption for
the purpose of session-key distribution (Figure 14.9). This protocol assumes that
each of the two parties is in possession of the current public key of the other. It may
not be practical to require this assumption.

       A protocol using timestamps is provided in [DENN81]:

1. A S AS:   IDA } IDB
2. AS S A:
3. A S B:    E(PRas, [IDA } PUa } T]) } E(PRas, [IDB } PUb } T])

             E(PRas, [IDA } PUa } T]) } E(PRas, [IDB } PUb } T]) }
             E(PUb, E(PRa, [Ks } T]))

       In this case, the central system is referred to as an authentication server (AS),
because it is not actually responsible for secret-key distribution. Rather, the AS pro-
vides public-key certificates. The session key is chosen and encrypted by A; hence,
there is no risk of exposure by the AS. The timestamps protect against replays of
compromised keys.

       This protocol is compact but, as before, requires the synchronization of clocks.
Another approach, proposed by Woo and Lam [WOO92a], makes use of nonces.
The protocol consists of the following steps.

1. A S KDC:  IDA } IDB
2. KDC S A:  E(PRauth, [IDB } PUb])
3. A S B:    E(PUb, [Na } IDA])
4. B S KDC:  IDA } IDB } E(PUauth, Na)
5. KDC S B:  E(PRauth, [IDA } PUa]) } E(PUb, E(PRauth, [Na } Ks } IDB]))

11For a discussion of some of the possible uses of the proxy capability, see [NEUM93b].
15.4 / REMOTE USER-AUTHENTICATION USING ASYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION 501

6. B S A:    E(PUa, [E(PRauth, [(Na } Ks } IDB)]) } Nb])
7. A S B:    E(Ks, Nb)

       In step 1, A informs the KDC of its intention to establish a secure connection

with B. The KDC returns to A a copy of B's public-key certificate (step 2). Using B's

public key, A informs B of its desire to communicate and sends a nonce Na (step 3).
In step 4, B asks the KDC for A's public-key certificate and requests a session key;

B includes A's nonce so that the KDC can stamp the session key with that nonce.

The nonce is protected using the KDC's public key. In step 5, the KDC returns to

B a copy of A's public-key certificate, plus the information {Na, Ks, IDB}. This infor-
mation basically says that Ks is a secret key generated by the KDC on behalf of B
and tied to Na; the binding of Ks and Na will assure A that Ks is fresh. This triple is
encrypted using the KDC's private key to allow B to verify that the triple is in fact

from the KDC. It is also encrypted using B's public key so that no other entity may

use the triple in an attempt to establish a fraudulent connection with A. In step 6,

the triple {Na, Ks, IDB}, still encrypted with the KDC's private key, is relayed to A,
together with a nonce Nb generated by B. All the foregoing are encrypted using A's
public key. A retrieves the session key Ks, uses it to encrypt Nb, and returns it to B.
This last message assures B of A's knowledge of the session key.

       This seems to be a secure protocol that takes into account the various attacks.

However, the authors themselves spotted a flaw and submitted a revised version of

the algorithm in [WOO92b]:

1. A S KDC:  IDA } IDB
2. KDC S A:  E(PRauth, [IDB } PUb])
3. A S B:    E(PUb, [Na } IDA])
4. B S KDC:  IDA } IDB } E(PUauth, Na)
5. KDC S B:  E(PRauth, [IDA } PUa]) } E(PUb, E(PRauth, [Na } Ks } IDA } IDB]))
6. B S A:    E(PUa, [Nb } E(PRauth, [Na } Ks } IDA } IDB])])
7. A S B:    E(Ks, Nb)

       The identifier of A, IDA, is added to the set of items encrypted with the KDC's
private key in steps 5 and 6. This binds the session key Ks to the identities of the two
parties that will be engaged in the session. This inclusion of IDA accounts for the
fact that the nonce value Na is considered unique only among all nonces generated
by A, not among all nonces generated by all parties. Thus, it is the pair {IDA, Na}
that uniquely identifies the connection request of A.

       In both this example and the protocols described earlier, protocols that ap-

peared secure were revised after additional analysis. These examples highlight the

difficulty of getting things right in the area of authentication.

One-Way Authentication

We have already presented public-key encryption approaches that are suited to
electronic mail, including the straightforward encryption of the entire message for
confidentiality (Figure 12.1b), authentication (Figure 12.1c), or both (Figure 12.1d).
These approaches require that either the sender know the recipient's public key
502 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

          (confidentiality), the recipient know the sender's public key (authentication), or
          both (confidentiality plus authentication). In addition, the public-key algorithm
          must be applied once or twice to what may be a long message.

                  If confidentiality is the primary concern, then the following may be more efficient:

                                            A S B: E(PUb, Ks) } E(Ks, M)

          In this case, the message is encrypted with a one-time secret key. A also encrypts this
          one-time key with B's public key. Only B will be able to use the corresponding private
          key to recover the one-time key and then use that key to decrypt the message. This
          scheme is more efficient than simply encrypting the entire message with B's public key.

                  If authentication is the primary concern, then a digital signature may suffice,
          as was illustrated in Figure 13.2:

                                              A S B: M } E(PRa, H(M))

                  This method guarantees that A cannot later deny having sent the message.
          However, this technique is open to another kind of fraud. Bob composes a mes-
          sage to his boss Alice that contains an idea that will save the company money. He
          appends his digital signature and sends it into the email system. Eventually, the
          message will get delivered to Alice's mailbox. But suppose that Max has heard of
          Bob's idea and gains access to the mail queue before delivery. He finds Bob's mes-
          sage, strips off his signature, appends his, and requeues the message to be delivered
          to Alice. Max gets credit for Bob's idea.

                  To counter such a scheme, both the message and signature can be encrypted
          with the recipient's public key:

                                        A S B: E(PUb, [M } E(PRa, H(M))])

                  The latter two schemes require that B know A's public key and be convinced
          that it is timely. An effective way to provide this assurance is the digital certificate,
          described in Chapter 14. Now we have

                              A S B: M } E(PRa, H(M)) } E(PRas, [T } IDA } PUa])

                  In addition to the message, A sends B the signature encrypted with A's private
          key and A's certificate encrypted with the private key of the authentication server.
          The recipient of the message first uses the certificate to obtain the sender's public
          key and verify that it is authentic and then uses the public key to verify the message
          itself. If confidentiality is required, then the entire message can be encrypted with
          B's public key. Alternatively, the entire message can be encrypted with a one-time
          secret key; the secret key is also transmitted, encrypted with B's public key. This ap-
          proach is explored in Chapter 19.

  15.5 FEDERATED IDENTITY MANAGEMENT

          Federated identity management is a relatively new concept dealing with the use of
          a common identity management scheme across multiple enterprises and numerous
          applications and supporting many thousands, even millions, of users. We begin our
          overview with a discussion of the concept of identity management and then examine
          federated identity management.
                                 15.5 / FEDERATED IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 503

Identity Management

Identity management is a centralized, automated approach to provide enterprise-
wide access to resources by employees and other authorized individuals. The focus
of identity management is defining an identity for each user (human or process),
associating attributes with the identity, and enforcing a means by which a user can
verify identity. The central concept of an identity management system is the use of
single sign-on (SSO).

       SSO enables a user to access all network resources after a single authentication.
       Typical services provided by a federated identity management system include
the following:

    Point of contact: Includes authentication that a user corresponds to the user
       name provided, and management of user/server sessions.

    SSO protocol services: Provides a vendor-neutral security token service for
       supporting a single sign on to federated services.

    Trust services: Federation relationships require a trust relationship-based
       federation between business partners. A trust relationship is represented by
       the combination of the security tokens used to exchange information about a
       user, the cryptographic information used to protect these security tokens, and
       optionally the identity mapping rules applied to the information contained
       within this token.

    Key services: Management of keys and certificates.

    Identity services: services that provide the interface to local data stores, includ-
       ing user registries and databases, for identity-related information management.

    Authorization: Granting access to specific services and/or resources based on
       the authentication.

    Provisioning: Includes creating an account in each target system for the user,
       enrollment or registration of user in accounts, establishment of access rights or
       credentials to ensure the privacy and integrity of account data.

    Management: Services related to runtime configuration and deployment.

       Note that Kerberos contains a number of the elements of an identity manage-
ment system.

       Figure 15.5 illustrates entities and data flows in a generic identity manage-
ment architecture. A principal is an identity holder. Typically, this is a human user
that seeks access to resources and services on the network. User devices, agent pro-
cesses, and server systems may also function as principals. Principals authenticate
themselves to an identity provider. The identity provider associates authentication
information with a principal, as well as attributes and one or more identifiers.

       Increasingly, digital identities incorporate attributes other than simply an iden-
tifier and authentication information (such as passwords and biometric information).
An attribute service manages the creation and maintenance of such attributes. For
example, a user needs to provide a shipping address each time an order is placed at a
new Web merchant, and this information needs to be revised when the user moves.
Identity management enables the user to provide this information once, so that it
is maintained in a single place and released to data consumers in accordance with
504 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION                                                 Principal

                                                                           Identity
                                                                           provider

                                              Data
                                           consumer

                                                                          Attribute
                                                                            service

                                                         Administrator

                       Figure 15.5 Generic Identity Management Architecture

authorization and privacy policies. Users may create some of the attributes to be
associated with their digital identity, such as an address. Administrators may also as-
sign attributes to users, such as roles, access permissions, and employee information.

       Data consumers are entities that obtain and employ data maintained and
provided by identity and attribute providers, which are often used to support autho-
rization decisions and to collect audit information. For example, a database server
or file server is a data consumer that needs a client's credentials so as to know what
access to provide to that client.

Identity Federation

Identity federation is, in essence, an extension of identity management to multiple
security domains. Such domains include autonomous internal business units, exter-
nal business partners, and other third-party applications and services. The goal is to
provide the sharing of digital identities so that a user can be authenticated a single
time and then access applications and resources across multiple domains. Because
these domains are relatively autonomous or independent, no centralized control is
possible. Rather, the cooperating organizations must form a federation based on
agreed standards and mutual levels of trust to securely share digital identities.

       Federated identity management refers to the agreements, standards, and
technologies that enable the portability of identities, identity attributes, and entitle-
ments across multiple enterprises and numerous applications and supporting many
thousands, even millions, of users. When multiple organizations implement interop-
erable federated identity schemes, an employee in one organization can use a single
sign-on to access services across the federation with trust relationships associated
with the identity. For example, an employee may log onto her corporate intranet
and be authenticated to perform authorized functions and access authorized ser-
vices on that intranet. The employee could then access their health benefits from an
outside health-care provider without having to reauthenticate.
                                 15.5 / FEDERATED IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 505

       Beyond SSO, federated identity management provides other capabilities. One
is a standardized means of representing attributes. Increasingly, digital identities
incorporate attributes other than simply an identifier and authentication informa-
tion (such as passwords and biometric information). Examples of attributes include
account numbers, organizational roles, physical location, and file ownership. A user
may have multiple identifiers; for example, each identifier may be associated with a
unique role with its own access permissions.

       Another key function of federated identity management is identity mapping.
Different security domains may represent identities and attributes differently.
Further, the amount of information associated with an individual in one domain
may be more than is necessary in another domain. The federated identity manage-
ment protocols map identities and attributes of a user in one domain to the require-
ments of another domain.

       Figure 15.6 illustrates entities and data flows in a generic federated identity
management architecture.

                     User

                           1

                              Identity provider

                  4           (source domain)

                                                 2

                                                                                            Administrator
                              3

  Service provider            1 End user's browser or other application engages
(destination domain)               in an authentication dialogue with identity provider

                                   in the same domain. End user also provides attribute

                                   values associated with user's identity.

                              2 Some attributes associated with an identity, such as
                                   allowable roles, may be provided by an administrator
                                   in the same domain.

                              3 A service provider in a remote domain, which the user
                                   wishes to access, obtains identity information,
                                   authentication information, and associated attributes
                                   from the identity provider in the source domain.

                                            4 Service provider opens session with remote user and
                                                 enforces access control restrictions based on user's
                                                 identity and attributes.

Figure 15.6 Federated Identity Operation

Hiva-Network.Com
506 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

                  The identity provider acquires attribute information through dialogue and pro-
          tocol exchanges with users and administrators. For example, a user needs to provide
          a shipping address each time an order is placed at a new Web merchant, and this
          information needs to be revised when the user moves. Identity management enables
          the user to provide this information once, so that it is maintained in a single place and
          released to data consumers in accordance with authorization and privacy policies.

                  Service providers are entities that obtain and employ data maintained and pro-
          vided by identity providers, often to support authorization decisions and to collect
          audit information. For example, a database server or file server is a data consumer
          that needs a client's credentials so as to know what access to provide to that client.
          A service provider can be in the same domain as the user and the identity provider.
          The power of this approach is for federated identity management, in which the ser-
          vice provider is in a different domain (e.g., a vendor or supplier network).

          STANDARDS Federated identity management uses a number of standards as the
          building blocks for secure identity exchange across different domains or heteroge-
          neous systems. In essence, organizations issue some form of security tickets for their
          users that can be processed by cooperating partners. Identity federation standards
          are thus concerned with defining these tickets, in terms of content and format, pro-
          viding protocols for exchanging tickets and performing a number of management
          tasks. These tasks include configuring systems to perform attribute transfers and
          identity mapping, and performing logging and auditing functions. The key stan-
          dards are as follows:

              The Extensible Markup Language (XML): A markup language that uses sets
                  of embedded tags or labels to characterize text elements within a document
                  so as to indicate their appearance, function, meaning, or context. XML docu-
                  ments appear similar to HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) documents
                  that are visible as Web pages, but provide greater functionality. XML includes
                  strict definitions of the data type of each field, thus supporting database for-
                  mats and semantics. XML provides encoding rules for commands that are used
                  to transfer and update data objects.

              The Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP): A minimal set of conventions
                  for invoking code using XML over HTTP. It enables applications to request
                  services from one another with XML-based requests and receive responses
                  as data formatted with XML. Thus, XML defines data objects and structures,
                  and SOAP provides a means of exchanging such data objects and performing
                  remote procedure calls related to these objects. See [ROS06] for an informa-
                  tive discussion.

              WS-Security: A set of SOAP extensions for implementing message integrity
                  and confidentiality in Web services. To provide for secure exchange of SOAP
                  messages among applications, WS-Security assigns security tokens to each
                  message for use in authentication.

              Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML): An XML-based language for
                  the exchange of security information between online business partners. SAML
                  conveys authentication information in the form of assertions about subjects.
                  Assertions are statements about the subject issued by an authoritative entity.
                                 15.5 / FEDERATED IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 507

       The challenge with federated identity management is to integrate multiple
technologies, standards, and services to provide a secure, user-friendly utility. The
key, as in most areas of security and networking, is the reliance on a few mature
standards widely accepted by industry. Federated identity management seems to
have reached this level of maturity.

EXAMPLES To get some feel for the functionality of identity federation, we look at
three scenarios, taken from [COMP06].

       In the first scenario (Figure 15.7a), Workplace.com contracts with Health.com
to provide employee health benefits. An employee uses a Web interface to sign on to
Workplace.com and goes through an authentication procedure there. This enables
the employee to access authorized services and resources at Workplace.com. When
the employee clicks on a link to access health benefits, her browser is redirected to
Health.com. At the same time, the Workplace.com software passes the user's identi-
fier to Health.com in a secure manner. The two organizations are part of a federation
that cooperatively exchanges user identifiers. Health.com maintains user identities

Authentication                                         End user                                 Authentication         End user
                                                      (employee)                                                      (employee)

                                                               Website access                                                  Website access

                   User ID                                                                                      Role

 Workplace.com                                        Health.com                Workplace.com                         PartsSupplier.com
                                                                               (employee portal)
(employee portal)                                     User store                                                           User store
                                                                                User store      Dept
     User store                                       Name ID                                   Eng                              Role
                                                      Joe 1213                 Name ID          Purch                         Engineer
     Name ID                                          Jane 1410                Joe 1213         Purch                        Purchaser
     Joe 1213                                         Ravi 1603                Jane 1410
     Jane 1410                                                                 Ravi 1603
     Ravi 1603

(a) Federation based on account linking                                                           (b) Federation based on roles

                                                       End user
                                                      (employee)

                   AutPhreonctruiecrqaetumieoesnnt t

                   SOAP message                                                                   SOAP message

Workplace.com                                                                  PinSupplies.com                          Eship.com
 (procurement                                                                  (Purchasing Web                        (shipping Web
  application)
                                                                                     service)                             service)

                                                          (c) Chained Web services
Figure 15.7 Federated Identity Scenarios
508 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

          for every employee at Workplace.com and associates with each identity health-bene-
          fits information and access rights. In this example, the linkage between the two com-
          panies is based on account information and user participation is browser based.

                  Figure 15.7b shows a second type of browser-based scheme. PartsSupplier.
          com is a regular supplier of parts to Workplace.com. In this case, a role-based
          access-control (RBAC) scheme is used for access to information. An engineer of
          Workplace.com authenticates at the employee portal at Workplace.com and clicks
          on a link to access information at PartsSupplier.com. Because the user is authen-
          ticated in the role of an engineer, he is taken to the technical documentation and
          troubleshooting portion of PartsSupplier.com's Web site without having to sign on.
          Similarly, an employee in a purchasing role signs on at Workplace.com and is au-
          thorized, in that role, to place purchases at PartsSupplier.com without having to
          authenticate to PartsSupplier.com. For this scenario, PartsSupplier.com does not
          have identity information for individual employees at Workplace.com. Rather, the
          linkage between the two federated partners is in terms of roles.

                  The scenario illustrated in Figure 15.7c can be referred to as document based
          rather than browser based. In this third example, Workplace.com has a purchasing
          agreement with PinSupplies.com, and PinSupplies.com has a business relationship
          with E-Ship.com. An employee of Workplace.com signs on and is authenticated to
          make purchases. The employee goes to a procurement application that provides a
          list of Workplace.com's suppliers and the parts that can be ordered. The user clicks
          on the PinSupplies button and is presented with a purchase order Web page (HTML
          page). The employee fills out the form and clicks the submit button. The procure-
          ment application generates an XML/SOAP document that it inserts into the enve-
          lope body of an XML-based message. The procurement application then inserts the
          user's credentials in the envelope header of the message, together with Workplace.
          com's organizational identity. The procurement application posts the message to
          the PinSupplies.com's purchasing Web service. This service authenticates the in-
          coming message and processes the request. The purchasing Web service then sends
          a SOAP message to its shipping partner to fulfill the order. The message includes
          a PinSupplies.com security token in the envelope header and the list of items to be
          shipped as well as the end user's shipping information in the envelope body. The
          shipping Web service authenticates the request and processes the shipment order.

  15.6 PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION

          User authentication based on the possession of a smart card is becoming more wide-
          spread. A smart card has the appearance of a credit card, has an electronic inter-
          face, and may use a variety of authentication protocols.

                  A smart card contains within it an entire microprocessor, including processor,
          memory, and I/O ports. Some versions incorporate a special co-processing circuit
          for cryptographic operation to speed the task of encoding and decoding messages or
          generating digital signatures to validate the information transferred. In some cards,
          the I/O ports are directly accessible by a compatible reader by means of exposed
          electrical contacts. Other cards rely instead on an embedded antenna for wireless
          communication with the reader.
                                   15.6 / PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION 509

       A typical smart card includes three types of memory. Read-only memory
(ROM) stores data that does not change during the card's life, such as the card
number and the cardholder's name. Electrically erasable programmable ROM
(EEPROM) holds application data and programs, such as the protocols that the
card can execute. It also holds data that may vary with time. For example, in a tele-
phone card, the EEPROM holds the talk time remaining. Random access memory
(RAM) holds temporary data generated when applications are executed.

       For the practical application of smart card authentication, a wide range of
vendors must conform to standards that cover smart card protocols, authentication
and access control formats and protocols, database entries, message formats, and so
on. An important step in this direction is FIPS 201-2 (Personal Identity Verification
[PIV] of Federal Employees and Contractors, June 2012). The standard defines a
reliable, government-wide PIV system for use in applications such as access to fed-
erally controlled facilities and information systems. The standard specifies a PIV
system within which common identification credentials can be created and later
used to verify a claimed identity. The standard also identifies Federal government-
wide requirements for security levels that are dependent on risks to the facility or
information being protected. The standard applies to private-sector contractors as
well, and serves as a useful guideline for any organization.

PIV System Model

Figure 15.8 illustrates the major components of FIPS 201-2 compliant systems. The
PIV front end defines the physical interface to a user who is requesting access to a
facility, which could be either physical access to a protected physical area or logical
access to an information system. The PIV front-end subsystem supports up to three-
factor authentication; the number of factors used depends on the level of security
required. The front end makes use of a smart card, known as a PIV card, which
is a dual-interface contact and contactless card. The card holds a cardholder pho-
tograph, X.509 certificates, cryptographic keys, biometric data, and a cardholder
unique identifier (CHUID). Certain cardholder information may be read-protected
and require a personal identification number (PIN) for read access by the card
reader. The biometric reader, in the current version of the standard, is a fingerprint
reader or an iris scanner.

       The standard defines three assurance levels for verification of the card and the
encoded data stored on the card, which in turn leads to verifying the authenticity of
the person holding the credential. A level of some confidence corresponds to use of
the card reader and PIN. A level of high confidence adds a biometric comparison
of a fingerprint captured and encoded on the card during the card-issuing process
and a fingerprint scanned at the physical access point. A very high confidence level
requires that the process just described is completed at a control point attended by
an official observer.

       The other major component of the PIV system is the PIV card issuance and
management subsystem. This subsystem includes the components responsible for
identity proofing and registration, card and key issuance and management, and the
various repositories and services (e.g., public key infrastructure [PKI] directory,
certificate status servers) required as part of the verification infrastructure.
510 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

PIV card issuance                                                                    Relying
and management
                    PKI directory &                                                  Physical Access Control                  Authorization
Identity profiling  certificate status                                                                                             data
 & registration
                        responder                                                                                                    Physical
                                                                                                                                     resource
                                                                                     I&A      Authorization

Card issuance
& maintenance

                                                                                     Logical Access Control

                         Key                                                         I&A      Authorization                   Logical
                    management                                                                                                resource

                                                                                                                              Authorization
                                                                                                                                   data

                                                                                     I&A = Identification and Authentication

                                                                        Card reader  Shapes     LEGEND
                                                                           /writer
                                                                                              Direction of information flow
                                                                          PIV card            Processes
                                                                         PIN input
                                                                                              Components
                                                                            device
                                                                          Biometric

                                                                            reader

                                                      PIV Front End

Figure 15.8 FIPS 201 PIV System Model

       The PIV system interacts with a relying subsystem, which includes compo-
nents responsible for determining a particular PIV cardholder's access to a physical
or logical resource. FIPS 201-2 standardizes data formats and protocols for interac-
tion between the PIV system and the relying system.

       Unlike the typical card number/facility code encoded on most access control
cards, the FIPS 201 CHUID takes authentication to a new level, through the use of
an expiration date (a required CHUID data field) and an optional CHUID digital
signature. A digital signature can be checked to ensure that the CHUID recorded
on the card was digitally signed by a trusted source and that the CHUID data have
not been altered since the card was signed. The CHUID expiration date can be
checked to verify that the card has not expired. This is independent from whatever
expiration date is associated with cardholder privileges. Reading and verifying the
CHUID alone provides only some assurance of identity because it authenticates
the card data, not the cardholder. The PIN and biometric factors provide identity
verification of the individual.

PIV Documentation

The PIV specification is quite complex, and NIST has issued a number of docu-
ments that cover a broad range of PIV topics. These are as follows:
                                   15.6 / PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION 511

    FIPS 201-2--Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees
       and Contractors: Specifies the physical card characteristics, storage media,
       and data elements that make up the identity credentials resident on the PIV
       card.

    SP 800-73-3--Interfaces for Personal Identity Verification: Specifies the in-
       terfaces and card architecture for storing and retrieving identity credentials
       from a smart card, and provides guidelines for the use of authentication mech-
       anisms and protocols.

    SP 800-76-2--Biometric Data Specification for Personal Identity Verification:
       Describes technical acquisition and formatting specifications for the biometric
       credentials of the PIV system.

    SP 800-78-3--Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Sizes for Personal Identity
       Verification: Identifies acceptable symmetric and asymmetric encryption algo-
       rithms, digital signature algorithms, and message digest algorithms, and speci-
       fies mechanisms to identify the algorithms associated with PIV keys or digital
       signatures.

    SP 800-104--A Scheme for PIV Visual Card Topography: Provides additional
       recommendations on the PIV card color-coding for designating employee
       affiliation.

    SP 800-116--A Recommendation for the Use of PIV Credentials in Physical
       Access Control Systems (PACS): Describes a risk-based approach for select-
       ing appropriate PIV authentication mechanisms to manage physical access to
       Federal government facilities and assets.

    SP 800-79-1--Guidelines for the Accreditation of Personal Identity
       Verification Card Issuers: Provides guidelines for accrediting the reliability
       of issuers of PIV cards that collect, store, and disseminate personal identity
       credentials and issue smart cards.

    SP 800-96--PIV Card to Reader Interoperability Guidelines: Provides re-
       quirements that facilitate interoperability between any card and any reader.

       In addition there are other documents that deal with conformance testing and
codes for identifiers.

PIV Credentials and Keys

The PIV card contains a number of mandatory and optional data elements that
serve as identity credentials with varying levels of strength and assurance. These
credentials are used singly or in sets to authenticate the holder of the PIV card to
achieve the level of assurance required for a particular activity or transaction. The
mandatory data elements are the following:

    Personal Identification Number (PIN): Required to activate the card for privi-
       leged operation.

    Cardholder Unique Identifier (CHUID): Includes the Federal Agency Smart
       Credential Number (FASC-N) and the Global Unique Identification Number
       (GUID), which uniquely identify the card and the cardholder.
512 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

              PIV Authentication Key: Asymmetric key pair and corresponding certificate
                  for user authentication.

              Two fingerprint templates: For biometric authentication.
              Electronic facial image: For biometric authentication.
              Asymmetric Card Authentication Key: Asymmetric key pair and correspond-

                  ing certificate used for card authentication.

                  Optional elements include the following:

              Digital Signature Key: Asymmetric key pair and corresponding certificate that
                  supports document signing and signing of data elements such as the CHUID.

              Key Management Key: Asymmetric key pair and corresponding certificate
                  supporting key establishment and transport.

              Symmetric Card Authentication Key: For supporting physical access applications.
              PIV Card Application Administration Key: Symmetric key associated with the

                  card management system.
              One or two iris images: For biometric authentication.

                  Table 15.5 lists the algorithm and key size requirements for PIV key types.

         Authentication

          Using the electronic credentials resident on a PIV card, the card supports the fol-
          lowing authentication mechanisms:

              CHUID: The cardholder is authenticated using the signed CHUID data ele-
                  ment on the card. The PIN is not required. This mechanism is useful in envi-
                  ronments where a low level of assurance is acceptable and rapid contactless
                  authentication is necessary.

Table 15.5 PIV Algorithms and Key Sizes

PIV Key Type             Algorithms Key Sizes (bits)       Application

PIV Authentication Key   RSA             2048              Supports card and
                         ECDSA           256               cardholder authentication
                                                           for an interoperable
Card Authentication Key  3TDEA           168               environment
                         AES             128, 192, or 256
Digital Signature Key    RSA             2048              Supports card authentication
Key Management Key       ECDSA           256               for physical access

                         RSA             2048 or 3072      Supports card
                         ECDSA           256 or 384        authentication for an
                         RSA             2048              interoperable environment
                         ECDH            256 or 384        Supports document signing
                                                           and nonce signing

                                                           Supports key establishment
                                                           and transport
                                   15.6 / PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION 513

    Card Authentication Key: The PIV card is authenticated using the Card
       Authentication Key in a challenge response protocol. The PIN is not required.
       This mechanism allows contact (via card reader) or contactless (via radio
       waves) authentication of the PIV card without the holder's active participa-
       tion, and provides a low level of assurance.

    BIO: The cardholder is authenticated by matching his or her fingerprint
       sample(s) to the signed biometric data element in an environment without a
       human attendant in view. The PIN is required to activate the card. This mecha-
       nism achieves a high level of assurance and requires the cardholder's active
       participation is submitting the PIN as well as the biometric sample.

    BIO-A: The cardholder is authenticated by matching his or her fingerprint
       sample(s) to the signed biometric data element in an environment with a
       human attendant in view. The PIN is required to activate the card. This mecha-
       nism achieves a very high level of assurance when coupled with full trust val-
       idation of the biometric template retrieved from the card, and requires the
       cardholder's active participation is submitting the PIN as well as the biometric
       sample.

    PKI: The cardholder is authenticated by demonstrating control of the PIV au-
       thentication private key in a challenge response protocol that can be validated
       using the PIV authentication certificate. The PIN is required to activate the
       card. This mechanism achieves a very high level of identity assurance and re-
       quires the cardholder's knowledge of the PIN.

       In each of the above use cases, except the symmetric Card Authentication Key
use case, the source and the integrity of the corresponding PIV credential are vali-
dated by verifying the digital signature on the credential, with the signature being
provided by a trusted entity.

       A variety of protocols can be constructed for each of these authentication
types. SP 800-78-3 gives examples for each type. Figure 15.9 illustrates an authenti-
cation scenario that includes the use of the PIV Authentication Key. This scenario
provides a high level of assurance. This scenario would be appropriate for authenti-
cation of a user who possesses a PIV card and seeks access to a computer resource.
The computer, designated local system in the figure, includes PIV application soft-
ware and communicates to the card via an application program interface that en-
ables the use of relatively high-level procedure calls. These high-level commands
are converted into PIV commands that are issued to the card through a physical
interface via a card reader or via a wireless interface. In either case, SP 800-73 refers
to the card command interface as the PIV card edge.

       The process begins when the local system detects the card either through an
attached card reader or wirelessly. It then selects an application on the card for au-
thentication. The local system then requests the public-key certificate for the card's
PIV Authentication Key. If the certificate is valid (i.e., has a valid signature, has not
expired or been revoked), authentication continues. Otherwise the card is rejected.
The next step is for the local system to request that the cardholder enter the PIN
for the card. If the submitted PIN matches the PIN stored on the card, the card
returns a positive acknowledgment; otherwise the card returns a failure message.
514 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

          The local system either continues or rejects the card accordingly. The next phase is
          a challenge-response protocol. The local system sends a nonce to be signed by the
          PIV, and the PIV returns the signature. The local system uses the PIV authentica-
          tion public key to verify the signature. If the signature is valid, the cardholder is ac-
          cepted as being identified. Otherwise the local system rejects the card.

                  The scenario of Figure 15.9 accomplishes three types of authentication. The
          combination of possession of the card and knowledge of the PIN service authenti-
          cates the cardholder. The PIV Authentication Key certificate validates the card's
          credentials. The challenge-response protocol authenticates the card.

            PIV Application                                       API on                                 PIV
            on Local System                                    Local System                          Card Edge

               Present card                       Connect                                Select application
                (HolderV)                   Begin transaction
                                            Select application
              Retrieve PIV
           AUTH certificate              PIV card app ID and Version
            Validate certificate     Read value (PIV Auth certificate)
        (signature, expiration, and
           revocation) (CredV)       PIV Auth certificate returned
            Retrieve algorithm
            ID and key size for             Verify PIN                                   Verify PIN
                                                PIN ACK                                  Sign nonce
             signature request
                                     Request card signature
             Acquire PIN
               (HolderV)                Signed nonce returned

              Retrieve FASC-N            End transaction
             from the certificate           Disconnect
             Verify signed

              data--card
           possesses private

             key (CardV)

Reject  Cardholder identifier

                                        CardV = Card validation
                                        CredV = Credential validation
                                        HolderV = Cardholder validation
                                        FASC-N = Federal Agency Smart Credential Number
                           Figure 15.9 Authentication Using PIV Authentication Key

Hiva-Network.Com
                         15.7 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 515
15.7 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS

Key Terms

authentication               Kerberos                        relying party (RP)
authentication server        Kerberos realm                  replay attack
claimant                     mutual authentication           subscriber
credential                   nonce                           suppress-replay attack
credential service provider  one-way authentication          ticket
                             personal identity verification  ticket-granting server (TGS)
    (CSP)                                                    timestamp
federated identity               (PIV)                       verifier
                             realm
    management               registration authority (RA)
identity management

Review Questions

 15.1      What are the steps involved in an authentication process?
 15.2      List three general approaches to dealing with replay attacks.
 15.3      What is a suppress-replay attack?
 15.4      What problem was Kerberos designed to address?
 15.5      What are three threats associated with user authentication over a network or
           Internet?
 15.6      List three approaches to secure user authentication in a distributed environment.
 15.7      What four requirements were defined for Kerberos?
 15.8      What entities constitute a full-service Kerberos environment?
 15.9      In the context of Kerberos, what is a realm?
15.10      What are the mandatory elements to authenticate a PIV card holder?

Problems

 15.1 In Section 15.4, we outlined the public-key scheme proposed in [WOO92a] for the
          distribution of secret keys. The revised version includes IDA in steps 5 and 6. What
          attack, specifically, is countered by this revision?

 15.2 The protocol referred to in Problem 15.1 can be reduced from seven steps to five,
          having the following sequence:
          a. A S B:
          b. A S KDC:
          c. KDC S B:
          d. B S A:
          e. A S B:

          Show the message transmitted at each step. Hint: The final message in this protocol is
          the same as the final message in the original protocol.

 15.3 Reference the suppress-replay attack described in Section 15.2 to answer the
          following.
          a. Give an example of an attack when a party's clock is ahead of that of the KDC.
          b. Give an example of an attack when a party's clock is ahead of that of another
              party.
516 CHAPTER 15 / USER AUTHENTICATION

             15.4 There are three typical ways to use nonces as challenges. Suppose Na is a nonce gen-
                      erated by A, A and B share key K, and f() is a function (such as an increment). The
                      three usages are

        Usage 1              Usage 2                        Usage 3
(1) A S B: Na        (1) A S B: E(K, Na)          (1) A S B: E(K, Na)
(2) B S A: E(K, Na)  (2) B S A: Na                (2) B S A: E(K, f(Na))

        Describe situations for which each usage is appropriate.

15.5 Show that a random error in one block of ciphertext is propagated to all subsequent
        blocks of plaintext in PCBC mode (See Figure T.2 in Appendix T).

15.6 Suppose that, in PCBC mode, blocks Ci and Ci+1 are interchanged during transmis-
        sion. Show that this affects only the decrypted blocks Pi and Pi+1 but not subsequent
        blocks.

15.7 In addition to providing a standard for public-key certificate formats, X.509 specifies
        an authentication protocol. The original version of X.509 contains a security flaw.
        The essence of the protocol is as follows.

                     A S B:  A {tA, rA, IDB}
                     B S A:  B {tB, rB, IDA, rA}
                     A S B:  A {rB}

where tA and tB are timestamps, rA and rB are nonces and the notation X{Y} indicates
that the message Y is transmitted, encrypted, and signed by X.

        The text of X.509 states that checking timestamps tA and tB is optional for
three-way authentication. But consider the following example: Suppose A and B
have used the preceding protocol on some previous occasion, and that opponent C
has intercepted the preceding three messages. In addition, suppose that timestamps
are not used and are all set to 0. Finally, suppose C wishes to impersonate A to B. C
initially sends the first captured message to B:

                                        C S B: A {0, rA, IDB}
B responds, thinking it is talking to A but is actually talking to C:

                                      B S C: B {0, r B= , IDA, rA}
C meanwhile causes A to initiate authentication with C by some means. As a result,
A sends C the following:

                                       A S C: A {0, r A= , IDC}
C responds to A using the same nonce provided to C by B:

                                     C S A: C {0, r B= , IDA, r A= }
A responds with

                                            A S C: A {r B= }
       15.7 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 517

       This is exactly what C needs to convince B that it is talking to A, so C now repeats the
       incoming message back out to B.

       C S B: A {r B= }

        So B will believe it is talking to A whereas it is actually talking to C. Suggest a simple
        solution to this problem that does not involve the use of timestamps.

15.8 Consider a one-way authentication technique based on asymmetric encryption:

       A S B:  IDA
       B S A:  R1
       A S B:  E(PRa, R1)

        a. Explain the protocol.
        b. What type of attack is this protocol susceptible to?

15.9 Consider a one-way authentication technique based on asymmetric encryption:

       A S B: IDA| | E(PUB,RA)

15.10                                             B S A: RA

15.11  a. Explain the protocol.
       b. What type of attack is this protocol susceptible to?
15.12  In Kerberos, when Bob receives a Ticket from Alice, how does he know it is not
15.13  genuine?
       In Kerberos, how does Bob know that the received token is not corresponding to
       Alice's?
       In Kerberos, how does Alice know that a reply to an earlier message is from Bob?
       In Kerberos, what does the Ticket contain that allows Alice and Bob to talk securely?
This page intentionally left blank
PART SIX: NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY

                            CHAPTER

Network Access Control
and Cloud Security

          16.1 Network Access Control
                          Elements of a Network Access Control System
                          Network Access Enforcement Methods

          16.2 Extensible Authentication Protocol
                          Authentication Methods
                          EAP Exchanges

          16.3 IEEE 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control
          16.4 Cloud Computing

                          Cloud Computing Elements
                          Cloud Computing Reference Architecture
          16.5 Cloud Security Risks and Countermeasures
          16.6 Data Protection in the Cloud
          16.7 Cloud Security as a Service
          16.8 Addressing Cloud Computing Security Concerns
          16.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                                                                               519
520 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

                              LEARNING OBJECTIVES

            After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
             Discuss the principal elements of a network access control system.
             Discuss the principal network access enforcement methods.
             Present an overview of the Extensible Authentication Protocol.
             Understand the operation and role of the IEEE 802.1X Port-Based

                 Network Access Control mechanism.
             Present an overview of cloud computing concepts.
             Understand the unique security issues related to cloud computing.

          This chapter begins our discussion of network security, focusing on two key topics:
          network access control and cloud security. We begin with an overview of network
          access control systems, summarizing the principal elements and techniques involved
          in such a system. Next, we discuss the Extensible Authentication Protocol and IEEE
          802.1X, two widely implemented standards that are the foundation of many network
          access control systems.

                  The remainder of the chapter deals with cloud security. We begin with an
          overview of cloud computing, and follow this with a discussion of cloud security
          issues.

  16.1 NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL

          Network access control (NAC) is an umbrella term for managing access to a
          network. NAC authenticates users logging into the network and determines what
          data they can access and actions they can perform. NAC also examines the health of
          the user's computer or mobile device (the endpoints).

         Elements of a Network Access Control System

          NAC systems deal with three categories of components:
              Access requestor (AR): The AR is the node that is attempting to access the
                  network and may be any device that is managed by the NAC system, including
                  workstations, servers, printers, cameras, and other IP-enabled devices. ARs are
                  also referred to as supplicants, or simply, clients.
              Policy server: Based on the AR's posture and an enterprise's defined policy,
                  the policy server determines what access should be granted. The policy server
                  often relies on backend systems, including antivirus, patch management, or a
                  user directory, to help determine the host's condition.
                                          16.1 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL 521

    Network access server (NAS): The NAS functions as an access control point
       for users in remote locations connecting to an enterprise's internal network.
       Also called a media gateway, a remote access server (RAS), or a policy server,
       an NAS may include its own authentication services or rely on a separate
       authentication service from the policy server.

       Figure 16.1 is a generic network access diagram. A variety of different ARs
seek access to an enterprise network by applying to some type of NAS. The first
step is generally to authenticate the AR. Authentication typically involves some
sort of secure protocol and the use of cryptographic keys. Authentication may be
performed by the NAS, or the NAS may mediate the authentication process. In the
latter case, authentication takes place between the supplicant and an authentication
server that is part of the policy server or that is accessed by the policy server.

       The authentication process serves a number of purposes. It verifies a suppli-
cant's claimed identity, which enables the policy server to determine what access
privileges, if any, the AR may have. The authentication exchange may result in the

          Supplicants

           Network access servers

Authentication  DHCP                                    VLAN
     server     server                                  server

                                                                Policy
                                                                server

Network             Patch Antivirus Antispyware
resources       management

                      Quarantine
                         network

                                    Enterprise network
Figure 16.1 Network Access Control Context
522 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

          establishment of session keys to enable future secure communication between the
          supplicant and resources on the enterprise network.

                  Typically, the policy server or a supporting server will perform checks on the
          AR to determine if it should be permitted interactive remote access connectivity.
          These checks--sometimes called health, suitability, screening, or assessment
          checks--require software on the user's system to verify compliance with certain
          requirements from the organization's secure configuration baseline. For example,
          the user's antimalware software must be up-to-date, the operating system must
          be fully patched, and the remote computer must be owned and controlled by the
          organization. These checks should be performed before granting the AR access to
          the enterprise network. Based on the results of these checks, the organization can
          determine whether the remote computer should be permitted to use interactive
          remote access. If the user has acceptable authorization credentials but the remote
          computer does not pass the health check, the user and remote computer should be
          denied network access or have limited access to a quarantine network so that autho-
          rized personnel can fix the security deficiencies. Figure 16.1 indicates that the quar-
          antine portion of the enterprise network consists of the policy server and related
          AR suitability servers. There may also be application servers that do not require the
          normal security threshold be met.

                  Once an AR has been authenticated and cleared for a certain level of access
          to the enterprise network, the NAS can enable the AR to interact with resources in
          the enterprise network. The NAS may mediate every exchange to enforce a security
          policy for this AR, or may use other methods to limit the privileges of the AR.

         Network Access Enforcement Methods

          Enforcement methods are the actions that are applied to ARs to regulate access
          to the enterprise network. Many vendors support multiple enforcement methods
          simultaneously, allowing the customer to tailor the configuration by using one or a
          combination of methods. The following are common NAC enforcement methods.

              IEEE 802.1X: This is a link layer protocol that enforces authorization before
                  a port is assigned an IP address. IEEE 802.1X makes use of the Extensible
                  Authentication Protocol for the authentication process. Sections 16.2 and 16.3
                  cover the Extensible Authentication Protocol and IEEE 802.1X, respectively.

              Virtual local area networks (VLANs): In this approach, the enterprise net-
                  work, consisting of an interconnected set of LANs, is segmented logically into
                  a number of virtual LANs.1 The NAC system decides to which of the network's
                  VLANs it will direct an AR, based on whether the device needs security reme-
                  diation, Internet access only, or some level of network access to enterprise
                  resources. VLANs can be created dynamically and VLAN membership, of
                  both enterprise servers and ARs, may overlap. That is, an enterprise server or
                  an AR may belong to more than one VLAN.

             1A VLAN is a logical subgroup within a LAN that is created via software rather than manually moving
             cables in the wiring closet. It combines user stations and network devices into a single unit regardless
             of the physical LAN segment they are attached to and allows traffic to flow more efficiently within
             populations of mutual interest. VLANs are implemented in port-switching hubs and LAN switches.
                          16.2 / EXTENSIBLE AUTHENTICATION PROTOCOL 523

    Firewall: A firewall provides a form of NAC by allowing or denying network
       traffic between an enterprise host and an external user. Firewalls are discussed
       in Chapter 23.

    DHCP management: The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is
       an Internet protocol that enables dynamic allocation of IP addresses to hosts.
       A DHCP server intercepts DHCP requests and assigns IP addresses instead.
       Thus, NAC enforcement occurs at the IP layer based on subnet and IP assign-
       ment. A DCHP server is easy to install and configure, but is subject to various
       forms of IP spoofing, providing limited security.

       There are a number of other enforcement methods available from vendors.
The ones in the preceding list are perhaps the most common, and IEEE 802.1X is by
far the most commonly implemented solution.

16.2 EXTENSIBLE AUTHENTICATION PROTOCOL

The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), defined in RFC 3748, acts as a
framework for network access and authentication protocols. EAP provides a set of
protocol messages that can encapsulate various authentication methods to be used
between a client and an authentication server. EAP can operate over a variety of
network and link level facilities, including point-to-point links, LANs, and other
networks, and can accommodate the authentication needs of the various links and
networks. Figure 16.2 illustrates the protocol layers that form the context for EAP.

Authentication Methods

EAP supports multiple authentication methods. This is what is meant by referring
to EAP as extensible. EAP provides a generic transport service for the exchange of
authentication information between a client system and an authentication server.
The basic EAP transport service is extended by using a specific authentication proto-
col, or method, that is installed in both the EAP client and the authentication server.

                  EAP-  EAP-   EAP-  EAP-          Other    Authentication
                  TLS   TTLS   PSK   IKEv2
                                                            methods

                  Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)  EAP
                                                            layer
                                              IEEE 802.1X
                                      EAP over LAN (EAPOL)

                  PPP   802.3  802.11       Other           Data link
                                                              layer
                        Ethernet WLAN

                  Figure 16.2 EAP Layered Context

Hiva-Network.Com
524 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

                  Numerous methods have been defined to work over EAP. The following are
          commonly supported EAP methods:

              EAP-TLS (EAP Transport Layer Security): EAP-TLS (RFC 5216) defines
                  how the TLS protocol (described in Chapter 17) can be encapsulated in EAP
                  messages. EAP-TLS uses the handshake protocol in TLS, not its encryption
                  method. Client and server authenticate each other using digital certificates.
                  Client generates a pre-master secret key by encrypting a random number with
                  the server's public key and sends it to the server. Both client and server use the
                  pre-master to generate the same secret key.

              EAP-TTLS (EAP Tunneled TLS): EAP-TTLS is like EAP-TLS, except only
                  the server has a certificate to authenticate itself to the client first. As in EAP-
                  TLS, a secure connection (the "tunnel") is established with secret keys, but
                  that connection is used to continue the authentication process by authenti-
                  cating the client and possibly the server again using any EAP method or
                  legacy method such as PAP (Password Authentication Protocol) and CHAP
                  (Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol). EAP-TTLS is defined in
                  RFC 5281.

              EAP-GPSK (EAP Generalized Pre-Shared Key): EAP-GPSK, defined in
                  RFC 5433, is an EAP method for mutual authentication and session key deri-
                  vation using a Pre-Shared Key (PSK). EAP-GPSK specifies an EAP method
                  based on pre-shared keys and employs secret key-based cryptographic algo-
                  rithms. Hence, this method is efficient in terms of message flows and com-
                  putational costs, but requires the existence of pre-shared keys between each
                  peer and EAP server. The set up of these pairwise secret keys is part of the
                  peer registration, and thus, must satisfy the system preconditions. It provides
                  a protected communication channel when mutual authentication is success-
                  ful for both parties to communicate over and is designed for authentication
                  over insecure networks such as IEEE 802.11. EAP-GPSK does not require
                  any public-key cryptography. The EAP method protocol exchange is done in a
                  minimum of four messages.

              EAP-IKEv2: It is based on the Internet Key Exchange protocol version 2
                  (IKEv2), which is described in Chapter 20. It supports mutual authentication
                  and session key establishment using a variety of methods. EAP-TLS is defined
                  in RFC 5106.

         EAP Exchanges

          Whatever method is used for authentication, the authentication information and
          authentication protocol information are carried in EAP messages.

                  RFC 3748 defines the goal of the exchange of EAP messages to be successful
          authentication. In the context of RFC 3748, successful authentication is an exchange
          of EAP messages, as a result of which the authenticator decides to allow access
          by the peer, and the peer decides to use this access. The authenticator's decision
          typically involves both authentication and authorization aspects; the peer may
          successfully authenticate to the authenticator, but access may be denied by the
          authenticator due to policy reasons.
               16.2 / EXTENSIBLE AUTHENTICATION PROTOCOL 525

                         EAP authenticator        Authentication server
                                                        (RADIUS)
EAP peer

Method                                               Method

 EAP peer/       EAP          EAP         EAP         EAP peer/
authenticator  messages  authenticator  messages     authenticator

 EAP layer                EAP layer                   EAP layer

Lower layer    802.1X,   Lower layer                 Lower layer
                PPP                          RADIUS

Figure 16.3 EAP Protocol Exchanges

       Figure 16.3 indicates a typical arrangement in which EAP is used. The follow-
ing components are involved:

    EAP peer: Client computer that is attempting to access a network.

    EAP authenticator: An access point or NAS that requires EAP authentication
       prior to granting access to a network.

    Authentication server: A server computer that negotiates the use of a specific
       EAP method with an EAP peer, validates the EAP peer's credentials, and
       authorizes access to the network. Typically, the authentication server is a
       Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) server.

       The authentication server functions as a backend server that can authenti-
cate peers as a service to a number of EAP authenticators. The EAP authentica-
tor then makes the decision of whether to grant access. This is referred to as the
EAP pass-through mode. Less commonly, the authenticator takes over the role of
the EAP server; that is, only two parties are involved in the EAP execution.

       As a first step, a lower-level protocol, such as PPP (point-to-point protocol)
or IEEE 802.1X, is used to connect to the EAP authenticator. The software entity
in the EAP peer that operates at this level is referred to as the supplicant. EAP
messages containing the appropriate information for a chosen EAP method are
then exchanged between the EAP peer and the authentication server.

       EAP messages may include the following fields:

    Code: Identifies the Type of EAP message. The codes are Request (1),
       Response (2), Success (3), and Failure (4).

    Identifier: Used to match Responses with Requests.

    Length: Indicates the length, in octets, of the EAP message, including the
       Code, Identifier, Length, and Data fields.
526 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

              Data: Contains information related to authentication. Typically, the Data field
                  consists of a Type subfield, indicating the type of data carried, and a Type-Data
                  field.

                  The Success and Failure messages do not include a Data field.
                  The EAP authentication exchange proceeds as follows. After a lower-level
          exchange that established the need for an EAP exchange, the authenticator sends a
          Request to the peer to request an identity, and the peer sends a Response with the
          identity information. This is followed by a sequence of Requests by the authentica-
          tor and Responses by the peer for the exchange of authentication information. The
          information exchanged and the number of Request­Response exchanges needed
          depend on the authentication method. The conversation continues until either
          (1) the authenticator determines that it cannot authenticate the peer and transmits
          an EAP Failure or (2) the authenticator determines that successful authentication
          has occurred and transmits an EAP Success.
                  Figure 16.4 gives an example of an EAP exchange. Not shown in the figure is a
          message or signal sent from the EAP peer to the authenticator using some protocol
          other than EAP and requesting an EAP exchange to grant network access. One
          protocol used for this purpose is IEEE 802.1X, discussed in the next section. The
          first pair of EAP Request and Response messages is of Type identity, in which the
          authenticator requests the peer's identity, and the peer returns its claimed identity
          in the Response message. This Response is passed through the authenticator to the
          authentication server. Subsequent EAP messages are exchanged between the peer
          and the authentication server.

          EAP authenticator  Authentication server
                                   (RADIUS)
EAP peer

          EAP-Request/Identity
                              EAP-Response/Identity
                                 EAP-Request/Auth
                                EAP-Response/Auth

                                 EAP-Request/Auth
                                EAP-Response/Auth
                               EAP-Success/Failure
Figure 16.4 EAP Message Flow in Pass-Through Mode
                      16.3 / IEEE 802.1X PORT-BASED NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL 527

                  Upon receiving the identity Response message from the peer, the server
          selects an EAP method and sends the first EAP message with a Type field related
          to an authentication method. If the peer supports and accepts the selected EAP
          method, it replies with the corresponding Response message of the same type.
          Otherwise, the peer sends a NAK, and the EAP server either selects another EAP
          method or aborts the EAP execution with a failure message. The selected EAP
          method determines the number of Request/Response pairs. During the exchange
          the appropriate authentication information, including key material, is exchanged.
          The exchange ends when the server determines that authentication has succeeded
          or that no further attempt can be made and authentication has failed.

  16.3 IEEE 802.1X PORT-BASED NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL

          IEEE 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control was designed to provide access
          control functions for LANs. Table 16.1 briefly defines key terms used in the IEEE
          802.11 standard. The terms supplicant, network access point, and authentication

Table 16.1 Terminology Related to IEEE 802.1X

  Authenticator
  An entity at one end of a point-to-point LAN segment that facilities authentication of the entity to the other
  end of the link.
  Authentication exchange
  The two-party conversation between systems performing an authentication process.
  Authentication process
  The cryptographic operations and supporting data frames that perform the actual authentication.
  Authentication server (AS)
  An entity that provides an authentication service to an authenticator. This service determines, from the
  credentials provided by supplicant, whether the supplicant is authorized to access the services provided by
  the system in which the authenticator resides.
  Authentication transport
  The datagram session that actively transfers the authentication exchange between two systems.
  Bridge port
  A port of an IEEE 802.1D or 802.1Q bridge.
  Edge port
  A bridge port attached to a LAN that has no other bridges attached to it.
  Network access port
  A point of attachment of a system to a LAN. It can be a physical port, such as a single LAN MAC attached to
  a physical LAN segment, or a logical port, for example, an IEEE 802.11 association between a station and an
  access point.
  Port access entity (PAE)
  The protocol entity associated with a port. It can support the protocol functionality associated with the
  authenticator, the supplicant, or both.
  Supplicant
  An entity at one end of a point-to-point LAN segment that seeks to be authenticated by an authenticator
  attached to the other end of that link.
528 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

          server correspond to the EAP terms peer, authenticator, and authentication server,
          respectively.

                  Until the AS authenticates a supplicant (using an authentication protocol),
          the authenticator only passes control and authentication messages between the sup-
          plicant and the AS; the 802.1X control channel is unblocked, but the 802.11 data
          channel is blocked. Once a supplicant is authenticated and keys are provided, the
          authenticator can forward data from the supplicant, subject to predefined access
          control limitations for the supplicant to the network. Under these circumstances,
          the data channel is unblocked.

                  As indicated in Figure 16.5, 802.1X uses the concepts of controlled and uncon-
          trolled ports. Ports are logical entities defined within the authenticator and refer to
          physical network connections. Each logical port is mapped to one of these two types
          of physical ports. An uncontrolled port allows the exchange of protocol data units
          (PDUs) between the supplicant and the AS, regardless of the authentication state
          of the supplicant. A controlled port allows the exchange of PDUs between a sup-
          plicant and other systems on the network only if the current state of the supplicant
          authorizes such an exchange.

                  The essential element defined in 802.1X is a protocol known as EAPOL (EAP
          over LAN). EAPOL operates at the network layers and makes use of an IEEE 802
          LAN, such as Ethernet or Wi-Fi, at the link level. EAPOL enables a supplicant to
          communicate with an authenticator and supports the exchange of EAP packets for
          authentication.

            Uncontrolled
                 port

                                                   Authentication server

Supplicant                             Network
                                     access point

                                   Controlled
                                       port

                                   Network or Internet

Figure 16.5 802.1X Access Control
                                     16.4 / CLOUD COMPUTING 529

Table 16.2 Common EAPOL Frame Types

 Frame Type                               Definition
EAPOL-EAP
EAPOL-Start   Contains an encapsulated EAP packet.
              A supplicant can issue this packet instead of waiting for
EAPOL-Logoff  a challenge from the authenticator.
              Used to return the state of the port to unauthorized when
EAPOL-Key     the supplicant is finished using the network.
              Used to exchange cryptographic keying information.

       The most common EAPOL packets are listed in Table 16.2. When the
supplicant first connects to the LAN, it does not know the MAC address of the
authenticator. Actually it doesn't know whether there is an authenticator present
at all. By sending an EAPOL-Start packet to a special group-multicast address
reserved for IEEE 802.1X authenticators, a supplicant can determine whether an
authenticator is present and let it know that the supplicant is ready. In many cases,
the authenticator will already be notified that a new device has connected from some
hardware notification. For example, a hub knows that a cable is plugged in before
the device sends any data. In this case the authenticator may preempt the Start mes-
sage with its own message. In either case the authenticator sends an EAP-Request
Identity message encapsulated in an EAPOL-EAP packet. The EAPOL-EAP is
the EAPOL frame type used for transporting EAP packets.

       The authenticator uses the EAP-Key packet to send cryptographic keys to the
supplicant once it has decided to admit it to the network. The EAP-Logoff packet
type indicates that the supplicant wishes to be disconnected from the network.

       The EAPOL packet format includes the following fields:

    Protocol version: version of EAPOL.

    Packet type: indicates start, EAP, key, logoff, etc.

    Packet body length: If the packet includes a body, this field indicates the body
       length.

    Packet body: The payload for this EAPOL packet. An example is an EAP
       packet.

       Figure 16.6 shows an example of exchange using EAPOL. In Chapter 18, we
examine the use of EAP and EAPOL in the context of IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN
security.

16.4 CLOUD COMPUTING

        There is an increasingly prominent trend in many organizations to move a substan-
        tial portion of or even all information technology (IT) operations to an Internet-
        connected infrastructure known as enterprise cloud computing. This section provides
        an overview of cloud computing. For a more detailed treatment, see [STAL16].
530 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

          EAP authenticator  Authentication server
                                   (RADIUS)
EAP peer

                               EAPOL-Start

                         EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Identity)

                        EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Identity)

                                         EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Auth)

                                        EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Auth)

                                         EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Auth)

                                        EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Auth)

                                            EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Success)

                              EAPOL-Logoff

          Figure 16.6 Example Timing Diagram for IEEE 802.1X

Cloud Computing Elements

NIST defines cloud computing, in NIST SP-800-145 (The NIST Definition of Cloud
Computing), as follows:

  Cloud computing: A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand net-
  work access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks,
  servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
  released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. This
  cloud model promotes availability and is composed of five essential characteris-
  tics, three service models, and four deployment models.

The definition refers to various models and characteristics, whose relationship is
illustrated in Figure 16.7. The essential characteristics of cloud computing include
the following:

    Broad network access: Capabilities are available over the network and ac-
       cessed through standard mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin
                                                               16.4 / CLOUD COMPUTING 531

Essential                 Broad       Rapid     Measured                On-Demand
   Characteristics  Network Access  Elasticity   Service                Self-Service

                                             Resource Pooling

Service                               Software as a Service (SaaS)
   Models                             Platform as a Service (PaaS)

                                    Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)

Deployment          Public          Private                    Hybrid   Community
   Models

Figure 16.7 Cloud Computing Elements

               or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, laptops, and PDAs) as well as
               other traditional or cloud-based software services.

            Rapid elasticity: Cloud computing gives you the ability to expand and reduce
               resources according to your specific service requirement. For example, you
               may need a large number of server resources for the duration of a specific task.
               You can then release these resources upon completion of the task.

            Measured service: Cloud systems automatically control and optimize resource
               use by leveraging a metering capability at some level of abstraction appropri-
               ate to the type of service (e.g., storage, processing, bandwidth, and active user
               accounts). Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported, provid-
               ing transparency for both the provider and consumer of the utilized service.

            On-demand self-service: A consumer can unilaterally provision computing
               capabilities, such as server time and network storage, as needed automati-
               cally without requiring human interaction with each service provider. Because
               the service is on demand, the resources are not permanent parts of your IT
               infrastructure.

            Resource pooling: The provider's computing resources are pooled to serve
               multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model, with different physical and
               virtual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned according to consumer
               demand. There is a degree of location independence in that the customer
           532 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

                                generally has no control or knowledge of the exact location of the provided
                                resources, but may be able to specify location at a higher level of abstraction
                                (e.g., country, state, or data center). Examples of resources include storage,
                                processing, memory, network bandwidth, and virtual machines. Even private
                                clouds tend to pool resources between different parts of the same organization.

                                NIST defines three service models, which can be viewed as nested service
                         alternatives:

                             Software as a service (SaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is to use
                                the provider's applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications
                                are accessible from various client devices through a thin client interface such as
                                a Web browser. Instead of obtaining desktop and server licenses for software
                                products it uses, an enterprise obtains the same functions from the cloud service.
                                SaaS saves the complexity of software installation, maintenance, upgrades, and
                                patches. Examples of services at this level are Gmail, Google's email service,
                                and Salesforce.com, which helps firms keep track of their customers.

                             Platform as a service (PaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is to
                                deploy onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applica-
                                tions created using programming languages and tools supported by the pro-
                                vider. PaaS often provides middleware-style services such as database and
                                component services for use by applications. In effect, PaaS is an operating
                                system in the cloud.

                             Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is
                                to provision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing
                                resources where the consumer is able to deploy and run arbitrary software,
                                which can include operating systems and applications. IaaS enables custom-
                                ers to combine basic computing services, such as number crunching and data
                                storage, to build highly adaptable computer systems.

                                NIST defines four deployment models:

                             Public cloud: The cloud infrastructure is made available to the general public
                                or a large industry group and is owned by an organization selling cloud ser-
                                vices. The cloud provider is responsible both for the cloud infrastructure and
                                for the control of data and operations within the cloud.

                             Private cloud: The cloud infrastructure is operated solely for an organization.
                                It may be managed by the organization or a third party and may exist on prem-
                                ise or off premise. The cloud provider (CP) is responsible only for the infra-
                                structure and not for the control.

                             Community cloud: The cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations
                                and supports a specific community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security
                                requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). It may be managed by the
                                organizations or a third party and may exist on premise or off premise.

                             Hybrid cloud: The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more clouds
                                (private, community, or public) that remain unique entities but are bound
                                together by standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and
                                application portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between clouds).

Hiva-Network.Com
                             16.4 / CLOUD COMPUTING 533

                                      Enterprise
                                     (Cloud user)

LAN
switch

        Router

                             Router   Cloud
                                     service
                 Network             provider
                or Internet
                                              LAN
                                             switch

                                                                      Servers

    Figure 16.8 Cloud Computing Context

       Figure 16.8 illustrates the typical cloud service context. An enterprise main-
tains workstations within an enterprise LAN or set of LANs, which are connected
by a router through a network or the Internet to the cloud service provider. The
cloud service provider maintains a massive collection of servers, which it man-
ages with a variety of network management, redundancy, and security tools. In the
figure, the cloud infrastructure is shown as a collection of blade servers, which is a
common architecture.

Cloud Computing Reference Architecture

NIST SP 500-292 (NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture) establishes a
reference architecture, described as follows:

  The NIST cloud computing reference architecture focuses on the requirements
  of "what" cloud services provide, not a "how to" design solution and implemen-
  tation. The reference architecture is intended to facilitate the understanding of
  the operational intricacies in cloud computing. It does not represent the system
  architecture of a specific cloud computing system; instead it is a tool for describ-
  ing, discussing, and developing a system-specific architecture using a common
  framework of reference.
534 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

              Cloud provider

   Cloud      Service orchestration        Cloud               Security           Cloud
 consumer     Service layer               service                    Privacy     broker
                                       management
   Cloud                 SaaS                                                     Service
  auditor            PaaS                 Business                            intermediation
                                           support
  Security         IaaS                                                           Service
    audit                                                                      aggregation
                Resource abstraction    Provisioning/
   Privacy        and control layer     configuration                             Service
impact audit                                                                     arbitrage
              Physical resource layer    Portability/
Performance           Hardware         interoperability
    audit
                       Facility

                                                Cloud carrier
Figure 16.9 NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture

       NIST developed the reference architecture with the following objectives
in mind:

    to illustrate and understand the various cloud services in the context of an
       overall cloud computing conceptual model

    to provide a technical reference for consumers to understand, discuss, catego-
       rize, and compare cloud services

    to facilitate the analysis of candidate standards for security, interoperability,
       and portability and reference implementations

       The reference architecture, depicted in Figure 16.9, defines five major actors
in terms of the roles and responsibilities:

    Cloud consumer: A person or organization that maintains a business relation-
       ship with, and uses service from, cloud providers.

    Cloud provider: A person, organization, or entity responsible for making a
       service available to interested parties.

    Cloud auditor: A party that can conduct independent assessment of cloud
       services, information system operations, performance, and security of the
       cloud implementation.

    Cloud broker: An entity that manages the use, performance, and delivery of
       cloud services, and negotiates relationships between CPs and cloud consumers.

    Cloud carrier: An intermediary that provides connectivity and transport of
       cloud services from CPs to cloud consumers.

       The roles of the cloud consumer and provider have already been discussed. To
summarize, a cloud provider can provide one or more of the cloud services to meet
IT and business requirements of cloud consumers. For each of the three service
                        16.5 / CLOUD SECURITY RISKS AND COUNTERMEASURES 535

        models (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), the CP provides the storage and processing facilities
        needed to support that service model, together with a cloud interface for cloud
        service consumers. For SaaS, the CP deploys, configures, maintains, and updates
        the operation of the software applications on a cloud infrastructure so that the
        services are provisioned at the expected service levels to cloud consumers. The
        consumers of SaaS can be organizations that provide their members with access to
        software applications, end users who directly use software applications, or software
        application administrators who configure applications for end users.

               For PaaS, the CP manages the computing infrastructure for the platform and
        runs the cloud software that provides the components of the platform, such as run-
        time software execution stack, databases, and other middleware components. Cloud
        consumers of PaaS can employ the tools and execution resources provided by CPs to
        develop, test, deploy, and manage the applications hosted in a cloud environment.

               For IaaS, the CP acquires the physical computing resources underlying the
        service, including the servers, networks, storage, and hosting infrastructure. The
        IaaS cloud consumer in turn uses these computing resources, such as a virtual
        computer, for their fundamental computing needs.

               The cloud carrier is a networking facility that provides connectivity and trans-
        port of cloud services between cloud consumers and CPs. Typically, a CP will set up
        service level agreements (SLAs) with a cloud carrier to provide services consistent
        with the level of SLAs offered to cloud consumers, and may require the cloud carrier
        to provide dedicated and secure connections between cloud consumers and CPs.

               A cloud broker is useful when cloud services are too complex for a cloud con-
        sumer to easily manage. Three areas of support can be offered by a cloud broker:

            Service intermediation: These are value-added services, such as identity man-
               agement, performance reporting, and enhanced security.

            Service aggregation: The broker combines multiple cloud services to meet
               consumer needs not specifically addressed by a single CP, or to optimize per-
               formance or minimize cost.

            Service arbitrage: This is similar to service aggregation except that the services
               being aggregated are not fixed. Service arbitrage means a broker has the flexibil-
               ity to choose services from multiple agencies. The cloud broker, for example, can
               use a credit-scoring service to measure and select an agency with the best score.

               A cloud auditor can evaluate the services provided by a CP in terms of secu-
        rity controls, privacy impact, performance, and so on. The auditor is an independent
        entity that can assure that the CP conforms to a set of standards.

16.5 CLOUD SECURITY RISKS AND COUNTERMEASURES

        In general terms, security controls in cloud computing are similar to the security
        controls in any IT environment. However, because of the operational models and
        technologies used to enable cloud service, cloud computing may present risks that
        are specific to the cloud environment. The essential concept in this regard is that
        the enterprise loses a substantial amount of control over resources, services, and
        applications but must maintain accountability for security and privacy policies.
536 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

                  The Cloud Security Alliance [CSA10] lists the following as the top cloud-
          specific security threats, together with suggested countermeasures:

              Abuse and nefarious use of cloud computing: For many CPs, it is relatively
                  easy to register and begin using cloud services, some even offering free limited
                  trial periods. This enables attackers to get inside the cloud to conduct various
                  attacks, such as spamming, malicious code attacks, and denial of service. PaaS
                  providers have traditionally suffered most from this kind of attacks; however,
                  recent evidence shows that hackers have begun to target IaaS vendors as well.
                  The burden is on the CP to protect against such attacks, but cloud service cli-
                  ents must monitor activity with respect to their data and resources to detect
                  any malicious behavior.
                         Countermeasures include (1) stricter initial registration and valida-
                  tion processes; (2) enhanced credit card fraud monitoring and coordination;
                  (3) comprehensive introspection of customer network traffic; and (4) monitor-
                  ing public blacklists for one's own network blocks.

              Insecure interfaces and APIs: CPs expose a set of software interfaces or APIs
                  that customers use to manage and interact with cloud services. The security
                  and availability of general cloud services are dependent upon the security of
                  these basic APIs. From authentication and access control to encryption and
                  activity monitoring, these interfaces must be designed to protect against both
                  accidental and malicious attempts to circumvent policy.
                         Countermeasures include (1) analyzing the security model of CP inter-
                  faces; (2) ensuring that strong authentication and access controls are imple-
                  mented in concert with encrypted transmission; and (3) understanding the
                  dependency chain associated with the API.

              Malicious insiders: Under the cloud computing paradigm, an organization
                  relinquishes direct control over many aspects of security and, in doing so, con-
                  fers an unprecedented level of trust onto the CP. One grave concern is the
                  risk of malicious insider activity. Cloud architectures necessitate certain roles
                  that are extremely high risk. Examples include CP system administrators and
                  managed security service providers.
                         Countermeasures include the following: (1) enforce strict supply chain
                  management and conduct a comprehensive supplier assessment; (2) specify
                  human resource requirements as part of legal contract; (3) require transpar-
                  ency into overall information security and management practices, as well as
                  compliance reporting; and (4) determine security breach notification processes.

              Shared technology issues: IaaS vendors deliver their services in a scalable way
                  by sharing infrastructure. Often, the underlying components that make up this
                  infrastructure (CPU caches, GPUs, etc.) were not designed to offer strong iso-
                  lation properties for a multi-tenant architecture. CPs typically approach this
                  risk by the use of isolated virtual machines for individual clients. This approach
                  is still vulnerable to attack, by both insiders and outsiders, and so can only be a
                  part of an overall security strategy.
                         Countermeasures include the following: (1) implement security best
                  practices for installation/configuration; (2) monitor environment for unauthor-
                  ized changes/activity; (3) promote strong authentication and access control
                                           16.6 / DATA PROTECTION IN THE CLOUD 537

               for administrative access and operations; (4) enforce SLAs for patching and
               vulnerability remediation; and (5) conduct vulnerability scanning and
               configuration audits.

            Data loss or leakage: For many clients, the most devastating impact from a
               security breach is the loss or leakage of data. We address this issue in the next
               subsection.
                      Countermeasures include the following: (1) implement strong API ac-
               cess control; (2) encrypt and protect integrity of data in transit; (3) analyze
               data protection at both design and run time; and (4) implement strong key
               generation, storage and management, and destruction practices.

            Account or service hijacking: Account or service hijacking, usually with stolen
               credentials, remains a top threat. With stolen credentials, attackers can often
               access critical areas of deployed cloud computing services, allowing them to
               compromise the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of those services.
                      Countermeasures include the following: (1) prohibit the sharing of
               account credentials between users and services; (2) leverage strong two-factor
               authentication techniques where possible; (3) employ proactive monitor-
               ing to detect unauthorized activity; and (4) understand CP security policies
               and SLAs.

            Unknown risk profile: In using cloud infrastructures, the client necessarily
               cedes control to the CP on a number of issues that may affect security. Thus
               the client must pay attention to and clearly define the roles and responsibili-
               ties involved for managing risks. For example, employees may deploy applica-
               tions and data resources at the CP without observing the normal policies and
               procedures for privacy, security, and oversight.
                      Countermeasures include (1) disclosure of applicable logs and data;
               (2) partial/full disclosure of infrastructure details (e.g., patch levels and
               firewalls); and (3) monitoring and alerting on necessary information.

               Similar lists have been developed by the European Network and Information
        Security Agency [ENIS09] and NIST [JANS11].

16.6 DATA PROTECTION IN THE CLOUD

        As can be seen from the previous section, there are numerous aspects to cloud
        security and numerous approaches to providing cloud security measures.
        A further example is seen in the NIST guidelines for cloud security, specified
        in SP-800-14 and listed in Table 16.3. Thus, the topic of cloud security is well
        beyond the scope of this chapter. In this section, we focus on one specific element
        of cloud security.

               There are many ways to compromise data. Deletion or alteration of records
        without a backup of the original content is an obvious example. Unlinking a record
        from a larger context may render it unrecoverable, as can storage on unreliable
        media. Loss of an encoding key may result in effective destruction. Finally, unau-
        thorized parties must be prevented from gaining access to sensitive data.
538 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

Table 16.3 NIST Guidelines on Security and Privacy Issues and Recommendations

  Governance
  Extend organizational practices pertaining to the policies, procedures, and standards used for application
  development and service provisioning in the cloud, as well as the design, implementation, testing, use, and
  monitoring of deployed or engaged services.

       Put in place audit mechanisms and tools to ensure organizational practices are followed throughout the
  system life cycle.

  Compliance
  Understand the various types of laws and regulations that impose security and privacy obligations on the
  organization and potentially impact cloud computing initiatives, particularly those involving data location,
  privacy and security controls, records management, and electronic discovery requirements.

       Review and assess the cloud provider's offerings with respect to the organizational requirements to be met
  and ensure that the contract terms adequately meet the requirements.

       Ensure that the cloud provider's electronic discovery capabilities and processes do not compromise the
  privacy or security of data and applications.

  Trust
  Ensure that service arrangements have sufficient means to allow visibility into the security and privacy
  controls and processes employed by the cloud provider, and their performance over time.

       Establish clear, exclusive ownership rights over data.
       Institute a risk management program that is flexible enough to adapt to the constantly evolving and
  shifting risk landscape for the life cycle of the system.
       Continuously monitor the security state of the information system to support ongoing risk management
  decisions.

  Architecture
  Understand the underlying technologies that the cloud provider uses to provision services, including the
  implications that the technical controls involved have on the security and privacy of the system, over the full
  system life cycle and across all system components.

  Identity and access management
  Ensure that adequate safeguards are in place to secure authentication, authorization, and other identity and
  access management functions, and are suitable for the organization.

  Software isolation
  Understand virtualization and other logical isolation techniques that the cloud provider employs in its
  multi-tenant software architecture, and assess the risks involved for the organization.

  Data protection
  Evaluate the suitability of the cloud provider's data management solutions for the organizational data
  concerned and the ability to control access to data, to secure data while at rest, in transit, and in use, and to
  sanitize data.

       Take into consideration the risk of collating organizational data with those of other organizations whose
  threat profiles are high or whose data collectively represent significant concentrated value.

       Fully understand and weigh the risks involved in cryptographic key management with the facilities
  available in the cloud environment and the processes established by the cloud provider.

  Availability
  Understand the contract provisions and procedures for availability, data backup and recovery, and disaster
  recovery, and ensure that they meet the organization's continuity and contingency planning requirements.

       Ensure that during an intermediate or prolonged disruption or a serious disaster, critical operations
  can be immediately resumed, and that all operations can be eventually reinstituted in a timely and organized
  manner.

  Incident response
  Understand the contract provisions and procedures for incident response and ensure that they meet the
  requirements of the organization.
                                             16.6 / DATA PROTECTION IN THE CLOUD 539

Table 16.3 Continued

       Ensure that the cloud provider has a transparent response process in place and sufficient mechanisms to
  share information during and after an incident.

       Ensure that the organization can respond to incidents in a coordinated fashion with the cloud provider in
  accordance with their respective roles and responsibilities for the computing environment.

                  The threat of data compromise increases in the cloud, due to the number of
          and interactions between risks and challenges that are either unique to the cloud or
          more dangerous because of the architectural or operational characteristics of the
          cloud environment.

                  Database environments used in cloud computing can vary significantly. Some
          providers support a multi-instance model, which provides a unique DBMS running
          on a virtual machine instance for each cloud subscriber. This gives the subscriber
          complete control over role definition, user authorization, and other administrative
          tasks related to security. Other providers support a multi-tenant model, which pro-
          vides a predefined environment for the cloud subscriber that is shared with other
          tenants, typically through tagging data with a subscriber identifier. Tagging gives
          the appearance of exclusive use of the instance, but relies on the CP to establish and
          maintain a sound secure database environment.

                  Data must be secured while at rest, in transit, and in use, and access to the
          data must be controlled. The client can employ encryption to protect data in transit,
          though this involves key management responsibilities for the CP. The client can
          enforce access control techniques but, again, the CP is involved to some extent
          depending on the service model used.

                  For data at rest, the ideal security measure is for the client to encrypt the data-
          base and only store encrypted data in the cloud, with the CP having no access to the
          encryption key. So long as the key remains secure, the CP has no ability to read the
          data, although corruption and other denial-of-service attacks remain a risk.

                  A straightforward solution to the security problem in this context is to encrypt
          the entire database and not provide the encryption/decryption keys to the service
          provider. This solution by itself is inflexible. The user has little ability to access
          individual data items based on searches or indexing on key parameters, but rather
          would have to download entire tables from the database, decrypt the tables, and
          work with the results. To provide more flexibility, it must be possible to work with
          the database in its encrypted form.

                  An example of such an approach, depicted in Figure 16.10, is reported in
          [DAMI05] and [DAMI03]. A similar approach is described in [HACI02]. Four enti-
          ties are involved:

               Data owner: An organization that produces data to be made available for
                  controlled release, either within the organization or to external users.

               User: Human entity that presents requests (queries) to the system. The user
                  could be an employee of the organization who is granted access to the data-
                  base via the server, or a user external to the organization who, after authenti-
                  cation, is granted access.

               Client: Frontend that transforms user queries into queries on the encrypted
                  data stored on the server.
540 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

                                                                      Metadata

                1. Original query        Metadata

                                                                      Database

                                                         Data owner

User            4. Plaintext
                result

      Client                   Query     2. Transformed      Query
                              processor  query              executor

                                         3. Encrypted    Cloud
                                         result          server

      Metadata                Encrypt/                                Encrypted
                              Decrypt                                 database

Figure 16.10 An Encryption Scheme for a Cloud-Based Database

              Server: An organization that receives the encrypted data from a data owner
                  and makes them available for distribution to clients. The server could in fact
                  be owned by the data owner but, more typically, is a facility owned and main-
                  tained by an external provider. For our discussion, the server is a cloud server.

                  Before continuing this discussion, we need to define some database terms.
          In relational database parlance, the basic building block is a relation, which is a flat
          table. Rows are referred to as tuples, and columns are referred to as attributes.
          A primary key is defined to be a portion of a row used to uniquely identify a row in
          a table; the primary key consists of one or more column names.2 For example, in
          an employee table, the employee ID is sufficient to uniquely identify a row in a
          particular table.

                  Let us first examine the simplest possible arrangement based on this scenario.
          Suppose that each individual item in the database is encrypted separately, all using
          the same encryption key. The encrypted database is stored at the server, but the
          server does not have the encryption key. Thus, the data are secure at the server.
          Even if someone were able to hack into the server's system, all he or she would have
          access to is encrypted data. The client system does have a copy of the encryption
          key. A user at the client can retrieve a record from the database with the following
          sequence:

              1. The user issues a query for fields from one or more records with a specific
                  value of the primary key.

      2Note that a primary key has nothing to do with cryptographic keys. A primary key in a database is a
      means of indexing into the database.
                                                            16.7 / CLOUD SECURITY AS A SERVICE 541

                            2. The query processor at the client encrypts the primary key, modifies the query
                                accordingly, and transmits the query to the server.

                            3. The server processes the query using the encrypted value of the primary key
                                and returns the appropriate record or records.

                            4. The query processor decrypts the data and returns the results.

                                This method is certainly straightforward but is quite limited. For example, sup-
                         pose the Employee table contains a salary attribute and the user wishes to retrieve
                         all records for salaries less than $70K. There is no obvious way to do this, because
                         the attribute value for salary in each record is encrypted. The set of encrypted values
                         does not preserve the ordering of values in the original attribute.

                                There are a number of ways to extend the functionality of this approach. For
                         example, an unencrypted index value can be associated with a given attribute and
                         the table can be partitioned based on these index values, enabling a user to retrieve
                         a certain portion of the table. The details of such schemes are beyond our scope.
                         See [STAL15] for more detail.

             16.7 CLOUD SECURITY AS A SERVICE

                         The term Security as a Service (SecaaS) has generally meant a package of security
                         services offered by a service provider that offloads much of the security respon-
                         sibility from an enterprise to the security service provider. Among the services
                         typically provided are authentication, antivirus, antimalware/-spyware, intrusion
                         detection, and security event management. In the context of cloud computing,
                         cloud security as a service, designated SecaaS, is a segment of the SaaS offering
                         of a CP.

                                The Cloud Security Alliance defines SecaaS as the provision of security
                         applications and services via the cloud either to cloud-based infrastructure and soft-
                         ware or from the cloud to the customers' on-premise systems [CSA11b]. The Cloud
                         Security Alliance has identified the following SecaaS categories of service:

                             Identity and access management
                             Data loss prevention
                             Web security
                             Email security
                             Security assessments
                             Intrusion management
                             Security information and event management
                             Encryption
                             Business continuity and disaster recovery
                             Network security

                                In this section, we examine these categories with a focus on security of the
                         cloud-based infrastructure and services (Figure 16.11).

Hiva-Network.Com
542 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

Encryption

                            Email security

                            Data loss       Security assessments
                            prevention      Security information and

                                                   event management
                                            Business continuity and

                                                   disaster recovery

Web security
                Intrusion
                management

                                        Identity and access management
                                        Network security

                                               Cloud service clients and adversaries

          Figure 16.11 Elements of Cloud Security as a Service

       Identity and access management (IAM) includes people, processes, and
systems that are used to manage access to enterprise resources by assuring that the
identity of an entity is verified, and then granting the correct level of access based
on this assured identity. One aspect of identity management is identity provision-
ing, which has to do with providing access to identified users and subsequently
deprovisioning, or deny access, to users when the client enterprise designates such
users as no longer having access to enterprise resources in the cloud. Another aspect
of identity management is for the cloud to participate in the federated identity man-
agement scheme (see Chapter 15) scheme used by the client enterprise. Among
other requirements, the cloud service provider (CSP) must be able to exchange
identity attributes with the enterprise's chosen identity provider.

       The access management portion of IAM involves authentication and access
control services. For example, the CSP must be able to authenticate users in a
trustworthy manner. The access control requirements in SPI environments include
establishing trusted user profile and policy information, using it to control access
within the cloud service, and doing this in an auditable way.

       Data loss prevention (DLP) is the monitoring, protecting, and verifying the
security of data at rest, in motion, and in use. Much of DLP can be implemented by
                                       16.7 / CLOUD SECURITY AS A SERVICE 543

the cloud client, such as discussed in Section 16.6. The CSP can also provide DLP
services, such as implementing rules about what functions can be performed on data
in various contexts.

       Web security is real-time protection offered either on premise through soft-
ware/appliance installation or via the cloud by proxying or redirecting Web traffic
to the CP. This provides an added layer of protection on top of things like antivi-
ruses to prevent malware from entering the enterprise via activities such as Web
browsing. In addition to protecting against malware, a cloud-based Web security
service might include usage policy enforcement, data backup, traffic control, and
Web access control.

       A CSP may provide a Web-based email service, for which security measures
are needed. Email security provides control over inbound and outbound email,
protecting the organization from phishing, malicious attachments, enforcing corpo-
rate polices such as acceptable use and spam prevention. The CSP may also incor-
porate digital signatures on all email clients and provide optional email encryption.

       Security assessments are third-part audits of cloud services. While this service
is outside the province of the CSP, the CSP can provide tools and access points to
facilitate various assessment activities.

       Intrusion management encompasses intrusion detection, prevention, and
response. The core of this service is the implementation of intrusion detection sys-
tems (IDSs) and intrusion prevention systems (IPSs) at entry points to the cloud
and on servers in the cloud. An IDS is a set of automated tools designed to detect
unauthorized access to a host system. We discuss this in Chapter 21. An IPS incor-
porates IDS functionality but also includes mechanisms designed to block traffic
from intruders.

       Security information and event management (SIEM) aggregates (via push or
pull mechanisms) log and event data from virtual and real networks, applications,
and systems. This information is then correlated and analyzed to provide real-time
reporting and alerting on information/events that may require intervention or other
type of response. The CSP typically provides an integrated service that can put
together information from a variety of sources both within the cloud and within the
client enterprise network.

       Encryption is a pervasive service that can be provided for data at rest in the
cloud, email traffic, client-specific network management information, and identity
information. Encryption services provided by the CSP involve a range of complex
issues, including key management, how to implement virtual private network (VPN)
services in the cloud, application encryption, and data content access.

       Business continuity and disaster recovery comprise measures and mechanisms
to ensure operational resiliency in the event of any service interruptions. This is
an area where the CSP, because of economies of scale, can offer obvious benefits
to a cloud service client [WOOD10]. The CSP can provide backup at multiple
locations, with reliable failover and disaster recovery facilities. This service must
include a flexible infrastructure, redundancy of functions and hardware, monitored
operations, geographically distributed data centers, and network survivability.

       Network security consists of security services that allocate access, distribute,
monitor, and protect the underlying resource services. Services include perimeter
and server firewalls and denial-of-service protection. Many of the other services
544 CHAPTER 16 / NETWORK ACCESS CONTROL AND CLOUD SECURITY

          listed in this section, including intrusion management, identity and access man-
          agement, data loss protection, and Web security, also contribute to the network
          security service.

16.8 ADDRESSING CLOUD COMPUTING SECURITY CONCERNS

Numerous documents have been developed to guide businesses thinking about the
security issues associated with cloud computing. In addition to SP 800-144, which
provides overall guidance, NIST has issued SP 800-146 (Cloud Computing Synopsis
and Recommendations, May 2012). NIST's recommendations systematically con-
sider each of the major types of cloud services consumed by businesses including
Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), and Platform as
a Service (PaaS). While security issues vary somewhat depending on the type of
cloud service, there are multiple NIST recommendations that are independent of
service type. Not surprisingly, NIST recommends selecting cloud providers that
support strong encryption, have appropriate redundancy mechanisms in place,
employ authentication mechanisms, and offer subscribers sufficient visibility about
mechanisms used to protect subscribers from other subscribers and the provider.
SP 800-146 also lists the overall security controls that are relevant in a cloud com-
puting environment and that must be assigned to the different cloud actors. These
are shown in Table 16.4.

       As more businesses incorporate cloud services into their enterprise net-
work infrastructures, cloud computing security will persist as an important issue.
Examples of cloud computing security failures have the potential to have a chilling
effect on business interest in cloud services and this is inspiring service providers
to be serious about incorporating security mechanisms that will allay concerns of
potential subscribers. Some service providers have moved their operations to Tier 4
data centers to address user concerns about availability and redundancy. Because so
many businesses remain reluctant to embrace cloud computing in a big way, cloud
service providers will have to continue to work hard to convince potential customers
that computing support for core business processes and mission critical applications
can be moved safely and securely to the cloud.

Table 16.4 Control Functions and Classes

             Technical                         Operational                   Management

Access Control                     Awareness and Training         Certification, Accreditation, and
Audit and Accountability           Configuration and Management   Security Assessment
Identification and Authentication  Contingency Planning           Planning Risk Assessment
System and Communication           Incident Response              System and Services Acquisition
Protection                         Maintenance
                                   Media Protection
                                   Physical and Environmental
                                   Protection
                                   Personnel Security System and
                                   Information Integrity
                            16.9 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 545
  16.9 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms

access requestor (AR)       EAP-IKEv2                  Network Access Server
authentication server       EAP over LAN (EAPOL)           (NAS)
cloud                       EAP method
cloud auditor               EAP pass-through mode      Platform as a Service (PaaS)
cloud broker                EAP peer                   policy server
cloud carrier               EAP-TLS                    private cloud
cloud computing             EAP-TTLS                   public cloud
cloud consumer              Extensible Authentication  Remote Access Server (RAS)
cloud provider                                         Security as a Service (SecaaS)
community cloud                 Protocol (EAP)         Software as a Service (SaaS)
Dynamic Host Configuration  firewall                   supplicant
                            IEEE 802.1X                Virtual Local Area Network
    Protocol (DHCP)         media gateway
EAP authenticator           Network Access Control         (VLAN)
EAP-GPSK
                                (NAC)

Review Questions

 16.1 Provide a brief definition of network access control.
 16.2 What is an EAP?
 16.3 List and briefly define four EAP authentication methods.
 16.4 What is DHCP? How useful is it to help achieve security of IP addresses?
 16.5 Why is EAPOL an essential element of IEEE 802.1X?
 16.6 What are the essential characteristics of cloud computing?
 16.7 List and briefly define the deployment models of cloud computing.
 16.8 What is the cloud computing reference architecture?
 16.9 Describe some of the main cloud-specific security threats.

Problems

 16.1 Investigate the network access control scheme used at your school or place of
          employment. Draw a diagram and describe the principal components.

 16.2 Figure 16.3 suggests that EAP can be described in the context of a four-layer model.
          Indicate the functions and formats of each of the four layers. You may need to refer
          to RFC 3748.

 16.3 List some commonly used cloud-based data services. Explore and compare these
          services based on their use of encryption, flexibility, efficiency, speed, and ease of use.
          Study security breaches on these services in recent past. What changes were made by
          the services after these attacks?
                            CHAPTER

Transport-Level Security

          17.1 Web Security Considerations
                          Web Security Threats
                          Web Traffic Security Approaches

          17.2 Transport Layer Security
                          TLS Architecture
                          TLS Record Protocol
                          Change Cipher Spec Protocol
                          Alert Protocol
                          Handshake Protocol
                          Cryptographic Computations
                          Heartbeat Protocol
                          SSL/TLS Attacks
                          TLSv1.3

          17.3 HTTPS
                          Connection Initiation
                          Connection Closure

          17.4 Secure Shell (SSH)
                          Transport Layer Protocol
                          User Authentication Protocol
                          Connection Protocol

          17.5 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

546
                                            17.1 / WEB SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 547

                           LEARNING OBJECTIVES

         After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

          Summarize Web security threats and Web traffic security approaches.
          Present an overview of Transport Layer Security (TLS).
          Understand the differences between Secure Sockets Layer and Transport

              Layer Security.
          Compare the pseudorandom function used in Transport Layer Security

              with those discussed earlier in the book.
          Present an overview of HTTPS (HTTP over SSL).
          Present an overview of Secure Shell (SSH).

        Virtually all businesses, most government agencies, and many individuals now have
        Web sites. The number of individuals and companies with Internet access is expanding
        rapidly and all of these have graphical Web browsers. As a result, businesses are enthu-
        siastic about setting up facilities on the Web for electronic commerce. But the reality
        is that the Internet and the Web are extremely vulnerable to compromises of various
        sorts. As businesses wake up to this reality, the demand for secure Web services grows.

               The topic of Web security is a broad one and can easily fill a book. In this chap-
        ter, we begin with a discussion of the general requirements for Web security and then
        focus on three standardized schemes that are becoming increasingly important as part
        of Web commerce and that focus on security at the transport layer: SSL/TLS, HTTPS,
        and SSH.

17.1 WEB SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

        The World Wide Web is fundamentally a client/server application running over the
        Internet and TCP/IP intranets. As such, the security tools and approaches discussed
        so far in this book are relevant to the issue of Web security. However, the following
        characteristics of Web usage suggest the need for tailored security tools:

            Although Web browsers are very easy to use, Web servers are relatively easy
               to configure and manage, and Web content is increasingly easy to develop, the
               underlying software is extraordinarily complex. This complex software may
               hide many potential security flaws. The short history of the Web is filled with
               examples of new and upgraded systems, properly installed, that are vulnerable
               to a variety of security attacks.

            A Web server can be exploited as a launching pad into the corporation's or
               agency's entire computer complex. Once the Web server is subverted, an
               attacker may be able to gain access to data and systems not part of the Web
               itself but connected to the server at the local site.
548 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

              Casual and untrained (in security matters) users are common clients for Web-
                  based services. Such users are not necessarily aware of the security risks that
                  exist and do not have the tools or knowledge to take effective countermeasures.

         Web Security Threats

          Table 17.1 provides a summary of the types of security threats faced when using the
          Web. One way to group these threats is in terms of passive and active attacks. Passive
          attacks include eavesdropping on network traffic between browser and server and
          gaining access to information on a Web site that is supposed to be restricted. Active
          attacks include impersonating another user, altering messages in transit between
          client and server, and altering information on a Web site.

                  Another way to classify Web security threats is in terms of the location of the
          threat: Web server, Web browser, and network traffic between browser and server.
          Issues of server and browser security fall into the category of computer system secu-
          rity; Part Six of this book addresses the issue of system security in general but is also
          applicable to Web system security. Issues of traffic security fall into the category of
          network security and are addressed in this chapter.

         Web Traffic Security Approaches

          A number of approaches to providing Web security are possible. The various
          approaches that have been considered are similar in the services they provide and,
          to some extent, in the mechanisms that they use, but they differ with respect to their
          scope of applicability and their relative location within the TCP/IP protocol stack.

Table 17.1 A Comparison of Threats on the Web

                 Threats                          Consequences                      Countermeasures

Integrity        r Modification of user data      r Loss of information             Cryptographic
                 r Trojan horse browser           r Compromise of machine           checksums
                 r Modification of memory         r Vulnerability to all other
                 r Modification of message
                                                     threats
                    traffic in transit

Confidentiality  r Eavesdropping on the net       r Loss of information             Encryption, Web
                 r Theft of info from server      r Loss of privacy                 proxies
                 r Theft of data from client
                 r Info about network

                    configuration
                 r Info about which client talks

                    to server

Denial of        r Killing of user threads        r Disruptive                      Difficult to prevent
Service          r Flooding machine with bogus    r Annoying
                                                  r Prevent user from getting work
                    requests
                 r Filling up disk or memory         done
                 r Isolating machine by DNS

                    attacks

Authentication r Impersonation of legitimate      r Misrepresentation of user       Cryptographic
                          users                   r Belief that false information   techniques

                       r Data forgery                is valid
                      17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 549

                      HTTP FTP SMTP                                                S/MIME
                                SSL or TLS
HTTP FTP SMTP                       TCP     Kerberos SMTP HTTP
              TCP                     IP
                                            UDP                                                TCP
            IP/IPSec
                                                                                           IP

(a) Network level     (b) Transport level   (c) Application level

Figure 17.1 Relative Location of Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack

       Figure 17.1 illustrates this difference. One way to provide Web security is
to use IP security (IPsec) (Figure 17.1a). The advantage of using IPsec is that it is
transparent to end users and applications and provides a general-purpose solution.
Furthermore, IPsec includes a filtering capability so that only selected traffic need
incur the overhead of IPsec processing.

       Another relatively general-purpose solution is to implement security just
above TCP (Figure 17.1b). The foremost example of this approach is the Secure
Sockets Layer (SSL) and the follow-on Internet standard known as Transport
Layer Security (TLS). At this level, there are two implementation choices. For full
generality, SSL (or TLS) could be provided as part of the underlying protocol suite
and therefore be transparent to applications. Alternatively, TLS can be embedded
in specific packages. For example, virtually all browsers come equipped with TLS,
and most Web servers have implemented the protocol.

       Application-specific security services are embedded within the particular
application. Figure 17.1c shows examples of this architecture. The advantage of this
approach is that the service can be tailored to the specific needs of a given application.

17.2 TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY

        One of the most widely used security services is Transport Layer Security (TSL);
        the current version is Version 1.2, defined in RFC 5246. TLS is an Internet stan-
        dard that evolved from a commercial protocol known as Secure Sockets Layer
        (SSL). Although SSL implementations are still around, it has been deprecated by
        IETF and is disabled by most corporations offering TLS software. TLS is a general-
        purpose service implemented as a set of protocols that rely on TCP. At this level,
        there are two implementation choices. For full generality, TLS could be provided
        as part of the underlying protocol suite and therefore be transparent to applica-
        tions. Alternatively, TLS can be embedded in specific packages. For example, most
        browsers come equipped with TLS, and most Web servers have implemented the
        protocol.

      TLS Architecture

        TLS is designed to make use of TCP to provide a reliable end-to-end secure ser-
        vice. TLS is not a single protocol but rather two layers of protocols, as illustrated in
        Figure 17.2.
550 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

Handshake    Change       Alert            HTTP  Heartbeat
 protocol  cipher spec  protocol                  protocol

            protocol

           Record protocol

                        TCP

                                                                                                 IP

                                                Figure 17.2 TLS Protocol Stack

                                The TLS Record Protocol provides basic security services to various higher-
                         layer protocols. In particular, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which
                         provides the transfer service for Web client/server interaction, can operate on top
                         of TLS. Three higher-layer protocols are defined as part of TLS: the Handshake
                         Protocol; the Change Cipher Spec Protocol; and the Alert Protocol. These TLS-
                         specific protocols are used in the management of TLS exchanges and are examined
                         later in this section. A fourth protocol, the Heartbeat Protocol, is defined in a sepa-
                         rate RFC and is also discussed subsequently in this section.

                                Two important TLS concepts are the TLS session and the TLS connection,
                         which are defined in the specification as follows:

                             Connection: A connection is a transport (in the OSI layering model definition)
                                that provides a suitable type of service. For TLS, such connections are peer-to-
                                peer relationships. The connections are transient. Every connection is associ-
                                ated with one session.

                             Session: A TLS session is an association between a client and a server. Sessions
                                are created by the Handshake Protocol. Sessions define a set of cryptographic
                                security parameters, which can be shared among multiple connections. Sessions
                                are used to avoid the expensive negotiation of new security parameters for
                                each connection.

                                Between any pair of parties (applications such as HTTP on client and server),
                         there may be multiple secure connections. In theory, there may also be multiple
                         simultaneous sessions between parties, but this feature is not used in practice.

                                There are a number of states associated with each session. Once a session is
                         established, there is a current operating state for both read and write (i.e., receive
                         and send). In addition, during the Handshake Protocol, pending read and write
                         states are created. Upon successful conclusion of the Handshake Protocol, the
                         pending states become the current states.

                                A session state is defined by the following parameters:

                             Session identifier: An arbitrary byte sequence chosen by the server to identify
                                an active or resumable session state.

                             Peer certificate: An X509.v3 certificate of the peer. This element of the state
                                may be null.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                         17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 551

    Compression method: The algorithm used to compress data prior to encryption.
    Cipher spec: Specifies the bulk data encryption algorithm (such as null, AES,

       etc.) and a hash algorithm (such as MD5 or SHA-1) used for MAC calculation.
       It also defines cryptographic attributes such as the hash_size.
    Master secret: 48-byte secret shared between the client and server.
    Is resumable: A flag indicating whether the session can be used to initiate new
       connections.

       A connection state is defined by the following parameters:

    Server and client random: Byte sequences that are chosen by the server and
       client for each connection.

    Server write MAC secret: The secret key used in MAC operations on data sent
       by the server.

    Client write MAC secret: The symmetric key used in MAC operations on data
       sent by the client.

    Server write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the
       server and decrypted by the client.

    Client write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the
       client and decrypted by the server.

    Initialization vectors: When a block cipher in CBC mode is used, an initial-
       ization vector (IV) is maintained for each key. This field is first initialized by
       the TLS Handshake Protocol. Thereafter, the final ciphertext block from each
       record is preserved for use as the IV with the following record.

    Sequence numbers: Each party maintains separate sequence numbers for
       transmitted and received messages for each connection. When a party sends or
       receives a "change cipher spec message," the appropriate sequence number is
       set to zero. Sequence numbers may not exceed 264 - 1.

TLS Record Protocol

The TLS Record Protocol provides two services for TLS connections:

    Confidentiality: The Handshake Protocol defines a shared secret key that is
       used for conventional encryption of TLS payloads.

    Message Integrity: The Handshake Protocol also defines a shared secret key
       that is used to form a message authentication code (MAC).

       Figure 17.3 indicates the overall operation of the TLS Record Protocol. The
Record Protocol takes an application message to be transmitted, fragments the data
into manageable blocks, optionally compresses the data, applies a MAC, encrypts,
adds a header, and transmits the resulting unit in a TCP segment. Received data
are decrypted, verified, decompressed, and reassembled before being delivered to
higher-level users.

       The first step is fragmentation. Each upper-layer message is fragmented into
blocks of 214 bytes (16,384 bytes) or less. Next, compression is optionally applied.
Compression must be lossless and may not increase the content length by more than
552 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                            Application data

       Fragment

       Compress

       Add MAC

       Encrypt

       Append TLS
       record header

       Figure 17.3 TLS Record Protocol Operation

1024 bytes.1 In TLSv2, no compression algorithm is specified, so the default com-
pression algorithm is null.

       The next step in processing is to compute a message authentication code over
the compressed data. TLS makes use of the HMAC algorithm defined in RFC 2104.
Recall from Chapter 12 that HMAC is defined as

       HMACK(M) = H[(K+  opad) ` H[(K+  ipad) ` M]]

where

H = embedded hash function (for TLS, either MD5 or SHA-1)

M = message input to HMAC

K+ = secret key padded with zeros on the left so that the result is equal to
           the block length of the hash code (for MD5 and SHA-1, block
           length = 512 bits)

ipad = 00110110 (36 in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits)
opad = 01011100 (5C in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits)

       For TLS, the MAC calculation encompasses the fields indicated in the
following expression:

       HMAC_hash(MAC_write_secret, seq_num ` TLSCompressed.type `
       TLSCompressed.version ` TLSCompressed.length ` TLSCompressed.fragment)

       The MAC calculation covers all of the fields XXX, plus the field
TLSCompressed.version, which is the version of the protocol being employed.

       Next, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted using symmetric
encryption. Encryption may not increase the content length by more than 1024 bytes,

1Of course, one hopes that compression shrinks rather than expands the data. However, for very short
blocks, it is possible, because of formatting conventions, that the compression algorithm will actually pro-
vide output that is longer than the input.
                                         17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 553

so that the total length may not exceed 214 + 2048. The following encryption algo-
rithms are permitted:

Block Cipher        Stream Cipher

Algorithm Key Size  Algorithm Key Size

AES   128, 256      RC4-128  128
3DES    168

       For stream encryption, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted.
Note that the MAC is computed before encryption takes place and that the MAC is
then encrypted along with the plaintext or compressed plaintext.

       For block encryption, padding may be added after the MAC prior to encryp-
tion. The padding is in the form of a number of padding bytes followed by a one-
byte indication of the length of the padding. The padding can be any amount that
results in a total that is a multiple of the cipher's block length, up to a maximum
of 255 bytes. For example, if the cipher block length is 16 bytes (e.g., AES) and if
the plaintext (or compressed text if compression is used) plus MAC plus padding
length byte is 79 bytes long, then the padding length (in bytes) can be 1, 17, 33, and
so on, up to 161. At a padding length of 161, the total length is 79 + 161 = 240. A
variable padding length may be used to frustrate attacks based on an analysis of
the lengths of exchanged messages.

       The final step of TLS Record Protocol processing is to prepend a header con-
sisting of the following fields:

    Content Type (8 bits): The higher-layer protocol used to process the enclosed
       fragment.

    Major Version (8 bits): Indicates major version of TLS in use. For TLSv2, the
       value is 3.

    Minor Version (8 bits): Indicates minor version in use. For TLSv2, the value is 1.

    Compressed Length (16 bits): The length in bytes of the plaintext fragment
       (or compressed fragment if compression is used). The maximum value is
       214 + 2048.

       The content types that have been defined are change_cipher_spec,
alert, handshake, and application_data. The first three are the TLS-
specific protocols, discussed next. Note that no distinction is made among the vari-
ous applications (e.g., HTTP) that might use TLS; the content of the data created by
such applications is opaque to TLS.

       Figure 17.4 illustrates the TLS record format.

Change Cipher Spec Protocol

The Change Cipher Spec Protocol is one of the four TLS-specific protocols that use
the TLS Record Protocol, and it is the simplest. This protocol consists of a single
message (Figure 17.5a), which consists of a single byte with the value 1. The sole
purpose of this message is to cause the pending state to be copied into the current
state, which updates the cipher suite to be used on this connection.
554 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                                            Content Major Minor Compressed

                                            type version version  length

                                 Encrypted            Plaintext
                                                    (optionally
                                                    compressed)

                                            MAC (0, 16, or 20 bytes)

                                 Figure 17.4 TLS Record Format

Alert Protocol

The Alert Protocol is used to convey TLS-related alerts to the peer entity. As with
other applications that use TLS, alert messages are compressed and encrypted, as
specified by the current state.

       Each message in this protocol consists of two bytes (Figure 17.5b). The first
byte takes the value warning (1) or fatal (2) to convey the severity of the message.
If the level is fatal, TLS immediately terminates the connection. Other connections
on the same session may continue, but no new connections on this session may
be established. The second byte contains a code that indicates the specific alert.
The following alerts are always fatal:

    unexpected_message: An inappropriate message was received.

    bad_record_mac: An incorrect MAC was received.

    decompression_failure: The decompression function received improper input
       (e.g., unable to decompress or decompress to greater than maximum allowable
       length).

    handshake_failure: Sender was unable to negotiate an acceptable set of secu-
       rity parameters given the options available.

    illegal_parameter: A field in a handshake message was out of range or incon-
       sistent with other fields.

                1 byte                      1 byte  3 bytes                 Ú 0 bytes
                    1                       Type    Length                  Content

(a) Change Cipher Spec Protocol                                   (c) Handshake Protocol

1 byte 1 byte                                           Ú 1 byte
Level Alert                                         Opaque content

(b) Alert Protocol                          (d) Other Upper-Layer Protocol (e.g., HTTP)

Figure 17.5 TLS Record Protocol Payload
                                       17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 555

 decryption_failed: A ciphertext decrypted in an invalid way; either it was not
    an even multiple of the block length or its padding values, when checked, were
    incorrect.

 record_overflow: A TLS record was received with a payload (ciphertext)
    whose length exceeds 214 + 2048 bytes, or the ciphertext decrypted to a length
    of greater than 214 + 1024 bytes.

 unknown_ca: A valid certificate chain or partial chain was received, but the
    certificate was not accepted because the CA certificate could not be located or
    could not be matched with a known, trusted CA.

 access_denied: A valid certificate was received, but when access control was
    applied, the sender decided not to proceed with the negotiation.

 decode_error: A message could not be decoded, because either a field was out
    of its specified range or the length of the message was incorrect.

 export_restriction: A negotiation not in compliance with export restrictions on
    key length was detected.

 protocol_version: The protocol version the client attempted to negotiate is
    recognized but not supported.

 insufficient_security: Returned instead of handshake_failure when a negotia-
    tion has failed specifically because the server requires ciphers more secure
    than those supported by the client.

 internal_error: An internal error unrelated to the peer or the correctness of
    the protocol makes it impossible to continue.

    The remaining alerts are the following.

 close_notify: Notifies the recipient that the sender will not send any more mes-
    sages on this connection. Each party is required to send a close_notify alert
    before closing the write side of a connection.

 bad_certificate: A received certificate was corrupt (e.g., contained a signature
    that did not verify).

 unsupported_certificate: The type of the received certificate is not supported.

 certificate_revoked: A certificate has been revoked by its signer.

 certificate_expired: A certificate has expired.

 certificate_unknown: Some other unspecified issue arose in processing the
    certificate, rendering it unacceptable.

 decrypt_error: A handshake cryptographic operation failed, including being
    unable to verify a signature, decrypt a key exchange, or validate a finished
    message.

 user_canceled: This handshake is being canceled for some reason unrelated to
    a protocol failure.

 no_renegotiation: Sent by a client in response to a hello request or by the
    server in response to a client hello after initial handshaking. Either of these
    messages would normally result in renegotiation, but this alert indicates that
    the sender is not able to renegotiate. This message is always a warning.
556 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

Handshake Protocol

The most complex part of TLS is the Handshake Protocol. This protocol allows
the server and client to authenticate each other and to negotiate an encryption and
MAC algorithm and cryptographic keys to be used to protect data sent in a TLS
record. The Handshake Protocol is used before any application data is transmitted.

       The Handshake Protocol consists of a series of messages exchanged by client
and server. All of these have the format shown in Figure 17.5c . Each message has
three fields:

    Type (1 byte): Indicates one of 10 messages. Table 17.2 lists the defined mes-
       sage types.

    Length (3 bytes): The length of the message in bytes.

    Content ( # 0 bytes): The parameters associated with this message; these are
       listed in Table 17.2.

       Figure 17.6 shows the initial exchange needed to establish a logical connection
between client and server. The exchange can be viewed as having four phases.

PHASE 1. ESTABLISH SECURITY CAPABILITIES Phase 1 initiates a logical connection
and establishes the security capabilities that will be associated with it. The exchange
is initiated by the client, which sends a client_hello message with the following
parameters:

    Version: The highest TLS version understood by the client.

    Random: A client-generated random structure consisting of a 32-bit time-
       stamp and 28 bytes generated by a secure random number generator. These
       values serve as nonces and are used during key exchange to prevent replay
       attacks.

    Session ID: A variable-length session identifier. A nonzero value indicates that
       the client wishes to update the parameters of an existing connection or to cre-
       ate a new connection on this session. A zero value indicates that the client
       wishes to establish a new connection on a new session.

Table 17.2 TLS Handshake Protocol Message Types

Message Type         Parameters
hello_request        null
client_hello         version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method
server_hello         version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method
certificate          chain of X.509v3 certificates
server_key_exchange  parameters, signature
certificate_request  type, authorities
server_done          null
certificate_verify   signature
client_key_exchange  parameters, signature
finished             hash value
                                     17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 557

      Client                           Server

              client_hello                      Phase 1
              server_hello                      Establish security capabilities, including
                                                protocol version, session ID, cipher suite,
                                                compression method, and initial random
                                                numbers.

                     certificate       Phase 2
              server_key_exchange      Server may send certificate, key exchange,
                                       and request certificate. Server signals end
               certificate_request     of hello message phase.
               server_hello_done

Time                 certificate
              client_key_exchange
                                       Phase 3
                 certificate_verify    Client sends certificate if requested. Client
                                       sends key exchange. Client may send
               change_cipher_spec      certificate verification.
                      finished
                                       Phase 4
              change_cipher_spec       Change cipher suite and finish
                        finished       handshake protocol.

                                       Note: Shaded transfers are
                                       optional or situation-dependent
                                       messages that are not always sent.

Figure 17.6 Handshake Protocol Action

    CipherSuite: This is a list that contains the combinations of cryptographic
       algorithms supported by the client, in decreasing order of preference. Each
       element of the list (each cipher suite) defines both a key exchange algorithm
       and a CipherSpec; these are discussed subsequently.

    Compression Method: This is a list of the compression methods the client
       supports.

       After sending the client_hello message, the client waits for the server_
hello message, which contains the same parameters as the client_hello
558 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

          message. For the server_hello message, the following conventions apply. The
          Version field contains the lowest of the version suggested by the client and the highest
          supported by the server. The Random field is generated by the server and is indepen-
          dent of the client's Random field. If the SessionID field of the client was nonzero, the
          same value is used by the server; otherwise the server's SessionID field contains the
          value for a new session. The CipherSuite field contains the single cipher suite selected
          by the server from those proposed by the client. The Compression field contains the
          compression method selected by the server from those proposed by the client.

                  The first element of the Ciphersuite parameter is the key exchange method
          (i.e., the means by which the cryptographic keys for conventional encryption and
          MAC are exchanged). The following key exchange methods are supported.

              RSA: The secret key is encrypted with the receiver's RSA public key. A public-
                  key certificate for the receiver's key must be made available.

              Fixed Diffie­Hellman: This is a Diffie­Hellman key exchange in which the
                  server's certificate contains the Diffie­Hellman public parameters signed by
                  the certificate authority (CA). That is, the public-key certificate contains the
                  Diffie­Hellman public-key parameters. The client provides its Diffie­Hellman
                  public-key parameters either in a certificate, if client authentication is re-
                  quired, or in a key exchange message. This method results in a fixed secret key
                  between two peers based on the Diffie­Hellman calculation using the fixed
                  public keys.

              Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman: This technique is used to create ephemeral (tem-
                  porary, one-time) secret keys. In this case, the Diffie­Hellman public keys are
                  exchanged and signed using the sender's private RSA or DSS key. The receiver
                  can use the corresponding public key to verify the signature. Certificates are used
                  to authenticate the public keys. This would appear to be the most secure of the
                  three Diffie­Hellman options because it results in a temporary, authenticated key.

              Anonymous Diffie­Hellman: The base Diffie­Hellman algorithm is used
                  with no authentication. That is, each side sends its public Diffie­Hellman pa-
                  rameters to the other with no authentication. This approach is vulnerable to
                  man-in-the-middle attacks, in which the attacker conducts anonymous Diffie­
                  Hellman with both parties.

                  Following the definition of a key exchange method is the CipherSpec, which
          includes the following fields:

              CipherAlgorithm: Any of the algorithms mentioned earlier: RC4, RC2, DES,
                  3DES, DES40, or IDEA

              MACAlgorithm: MD5 or SHA-1

              CipherType: Stream or Block

              IsExportable: True or False

              HashSize: 0, 16 (for MD5), or 20 (for SHA-1) bytes

              Key Material: A sequence of bytes that contain data used in generating the
                  write keys

              IV Size: The size of the Initialization Value for Cipher Block Chaining (CBC)
                  encryption
                                                              17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 559

                         PHASE 2. SERVER AUTHENTICATION AND KEY EXCHANGE The server begins this
                         phase by sending its certificate if it needs to be authenticated; the message con-
                         tains one or a chain of X.509 certificates. The certificate message is required for
                         any agreed-on key exchange method except anonymous Diffie­Hellman. Note
                         that if fixed Diffie­Hellman is used, this certificate message functions as the serv-
                         er's key exchange message because it contains the server's public Diffie­Hellman
                         parameters.

                                Next, a server_key_exchange message may be sent if it is required. It is not
                         required in two instances: (1) The server has sent a certificate with fixed Diffie­
                         Hellman parameters; or (2) RSA key exchange is to be used. The server_key_
                         exchange message is needed for the following:

                             Anonymous Diffie­Hellman: The message content consists of the two global
                                Diffie­Hellman values (a prime number and a primitive root of that number)
                                plus the server's public Diffie­Hellman key (see Figure 10.1).

                             Ephemeral Diffie­Hellman: The message content includes the three Diffie­
                                Hellman parameters provided for anonymous Diffie­Hellman plus a signature
                                of those parameters.

                             RSA key exchange (in which the server is using RSA but has a signature-only
                                RSA key): Accordingly, the client cannot simply send a secret key encrypted
                                with the server's public key. Instead, the server must create a temporary RSA
                                public/private key pair and use the server_key_exchange message to send the
                                public key. The message content includes the two parameters of the temporary
                                RSA public key (exponent and modulus; see Figure 9.5) plus a signature of
                                those parameters.

                                Some further details about the signatures are warranted. As usual, a signature
                         is created by taking the hash of a message and encrypting it with the sender's private
                         key. In this case, the hash is defined as

                                    hash(ClientHello.random ` ServerHello.random ` ServerParams)

                         So the hash covers not only the Diffie­Hellman or RSA parameters but also the
                         two nonces from the initial hello messages. This ensures against replay attacks and
                         misrepresentation. In the case of a DSS signature, the hash is performed using the
                         SHA-1 algorithm. In the case of an RSA signature, both an MD5 and an SHA-1
                         hash are calculated, and the concatenation of the two hashes (36 bytes) is encrypted
                         with the server's private key.

                                Next, a nonanonymous server (server not using anonymous Diffie­Hellman)
                         can request a certificate from the client. The certificate_request message includes
                         two parameters: certificate_type and certificate_authorities. The certificate type in-
                         dicates the public-key algorithm and its use:

                             RSA, signature only

                             DSS, signature only

                             RSA for fixed Diffie­Hellman; in this case the signature is used only for
                                authentication, by sending a certificate signed with RSA

                             DSS for fixed Diffie­Hellman; again, used only for authentication

Hiva-Network.Com
560 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                  The second parameter in the certificate_request message is a list of the distin-
          guished names of acceptable certificate authorities.

                  The final message in phase 2, and one that is always required, is the server_
          done message, which is sent by the server to indicate the end of the server hello and
          associated messages. After sending this message, the server will wait for a client
          response. This message has no parameters.

          PHASE 3. CLIENT AUTHENTICATION AND KEY EXCHANGE Upon receipt of the
          server_done message, the client should verify that the server provided a valid
          certificate (if required) and check that the server_hello parameters are accept-
          able. If all is satisfactory, the client sends one or more messages back to the server.

                  If the server has requested a certificate, the client begins this phase by send-
          ing a certificate message. If no suitable certificate is available, the client sends a
          no_certificate alert instead.

                  Next is the client_key_exchange message, which must be sent in this phase.
          The content of the message depends on the type of key exchange, as follows:

              RSA: The client generates a 48-byte pre-master secret and encrypts with the
                  public key from the server's certificate or temporary RSA key from a server_
                  key_exchange message. Its use to compute a master secret is explained later.

              Ephemeral or Anonymous Diffie­Hellman: The client's public Diffie­Hellman
                  parameters are sent.

              Fixed Diffie­Hellman: The client's public Diffie­Hellman parameters were
                  sent in a certificate message, so the content of this message is null.

                  Finally, in this phase, the client may send a certificate_verify message to pro-
          vide explicit verification of a client certificate. This message is only sent following
          any client certificate that has signing capability (i.e., all certificates except those
          containing fixed Diffie­Hellman parameters). This message signs a hash code based
          on the preceding messages, defined as

                  CertificateVerify.signature.md5_hash

                     MD5(handshake_messages);

                  Certificate.signature.sha_hash
                     SHA(handshake_messages);

          where handshake_messages refers to all Handshake Protocol messages sent or
          received starting at client_hello but not including this message. If the user's
          private key is DSS, then it is used to encrypt the SHA-1 hash. If the user's private
          key is RSA, it is used to encrypt the concatenation of the MD5 and SHA-1 hashes.
          In either case, the purpose is to verify the client's ownership of the private key for
          the client certificate. Even if someone is misusing the client's certificate, he or she
          would be unable to send this message.

          PHASE 4. FINISH Phase 4 completes the setting up of a secure connection. The client
          sends a change_cipher_spec message and copies the pending CipherSpec into the
          current CipherSpec. Note that this message is not considered part of the Handshake
          Protocol but is sent using the Change Cipher Spec Protocol. The client then imme-
          diately sends the finished message under the new algorithms, keys, and secrets.
                                         17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 561

The finished message verifies that the key exchange and authentication processes
were successful. The content of the finished message is:

      PRF(master_secret, finished_label, MD5(handshake_messages) ` SHA@1
                                      (handshake_messages))

where finished_label is the string "client finished" for the client and "server
finished" for the server.

       In response to these two messages, the server sends its own change_cipher_
spec message, transfers the pending to the current CipherSpec, and sends its fin-
ished message. At this point, the handshake is complete and the client and server
may begin to exchange application-layer data.

Cryptographic Computations

Two further items are of interest: (1) the creation of a shared master secret by
means of the key exchange; and (2) the generation of cryptographic parameters
from the master secret.

MASTER SECRET CREATION The shared master secret is a one-time 48-byte value
(384 bits) generated for this session by means of secure key exchange. The creation
is in two stages. First, a pre_master_secret is exchanged. Second, the master_
secret is calculated by both parties. For pre_master_secret exchange, there
are two possibilities.

    RSA: A 48-byte pre_master_secret is generated by the client, encrypted with
       the server's public RSA key, and sent to the server. The server decrypts the
       ciphertext using its private key to recover the pre_master_secret.

    Diffie­Hellman: Both client and server generate a Diffie­Hellman public key.
       After these are exchanged, each side performs the Diffie­Hellman calculation
       to create the shared pre_master_secret.

       Both sides now compute the master_secret as

       master_secret =
          PRF(pre_master_secret, "master secret", ClientHello.random ` ServerHello

       .random)

where ClientHello.random and ServerHello.random are the two nonce
values exchanged in the initial hello messages.

       The algorithm is performed until 48 bytes of pseudorandom output are pro-
duced. The calculation of the key block material (MAC secret keys, session encryp-
tion keys, and IVs) is defined as

       key_block =
          PRF(SecurityParameters.master_secret, "key expansion",

       SecurityParameters.server_random ` SecurityParameters.client_random)

until enough output has been generated.
562 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

          GENERATION OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS CipherSpecs require a client write
          MAC secret, a server write MAC secret, a client write key, a server write key, a
          client write IV, and a server write IV, which are generated from the master secret
          in that order. These parameters are generated from the master secret by hashing
          the master secret into a sequence of secure bytes of sufficient length for all needed
          parameters.

                  The generation of the key material from the master secret uses the same for-
          mat for generation of the master secret from the pre-master secret as

                       key_block = MD5(master_secret ` SHA(=A> ` master_secret `
                                                  ServerHello.random ` ClientHello.random)) `

                                          MD5(master_secret ` SHA(=BB> ` master_secret `
                                                  ServerHello.random ` ClientHello.random)) `

                                          MD5(master_secret ` SHA(=CCC> ` master_secret `
                                              ServerHello.random ` ClientHello.random)) ` c

          until enough output has been generated. The result of this algorithmic structure is a
          pseudorandom function. We can view the master_secret as the pseudorandom
          seed value to the function. The client and server random numbers can be viewed as
          salt values to complicate cryptanalysis (see Chapter 21 for a discussion of the use of
          salt values).

          PSEUDORANDOM FUNCTION TLS makes use of a pseudorandom function referred
          to as PRF to expand secrets into blocks of data for purposes of key generation or
          validation. The objective is to make use of a relatively small, shared secret value but
          to generate longer blocks of data in a way that is secure from the kinds of attacks
          made on hash functions and MACs. The PRF is based on the data expansion func-
          tion (Figure 17.7) given as

                          P_hash(secret, seed) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(1) ` seed) `
                                                          HMAC_hash(secret, A(2) ` seed) `
                                                         HMAC_hash(secret, A(3) ` seed) `

          where A() is defined as

                  A(0) = seed
                  A(i) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(i - 1))

          The data expansion function makes use of the HMAC algorithm with either MD5
          or SHA-1 as the underlying hash function. As can be seen, P_hash can be iterated
          as many times as necessary to produce the required quantity of data. For example, if
          P_SHA256 was used to generate 80 bytes of data, it would have to be iterated three
          times (through A(3)), producing 96 bytes of data of which the last 16 would be dis-
          carded. In this case, P_MD5 would have to be iterated four times, producing exactly
          64 bytes of data. Note that each iteration involves two executions of HMAC, each
          of which in turn involves two executions of the underlying hash algorithm.
                                 17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 563

        Seed

Secret  HMAC

                            A(1)

                        Seed

Secret  HMAC Secret               HMAC

                                                      A(2)

                                                  Seed

        Secret                    HMAC Secret               HMAC

                                                                             A(3)

                                                                            Seed

                                  Secret                    HMAC

                                                     Length = hash size
  Figure 17.7 TLS Function P_hash(secret, seed)

       To make PRF as secure as possible, it uses two hash algorithms in a way that
should guarantee its security if either algorithm remains secure. PRF is defined as

                PRF(secret, label, seed) = P_6 hash 7 (secret, label ` seed)

       PRF takes as input a secret value, an identifying label, and a seed value and
produces an output of arbitrary length.

Heartbeat Protocol

In the context of computer networks, a heartbeat is a periodic signal generated by
hardware or software to indicate normal operation or to synchronize other parts of
a system. A heartbeat protocol is typically used to monitor the availability of a pro-
tocol entity. In the specific case of TLS, a Heartbeat protocol was defined in 2012 in
RFC 6250 (Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
(DTLS) Heartbeat Extension).
564 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                  The Heartbeat protocol runs on top of the TLS Record Protocol and con-
          sists of two message types: heartbeat_request and heartbeat_response.
          The use of the Heartbeat protocol is established during Phase 1 of the Handshake
          protocol (Figure 17.6). Each peer indicates whether it supports heartbeats. If heart-
          beats are supported, the peer indicates whether it is willing to receive heartbeat_
          request messages and respond with heartbeat_response messages or only
          willing to send heartbeat_request messages.

                  A heartbeat_request message can be sent at any time. Whenever a re-
          quest message is received, it should be answered promptly with a corresponding
          heartbeat_response message. The heartbeat_request message includes
          payload length, payload, and padding fields. The payload is a random content
          between 16 bytes and 64 Kbytes in length. The corresponding heartbeat_
          response message must include an exact copy of the received payload. The pad-
          ding is also random content. The padding enables the sender to perform a path
          MTU (maximum transfer unit) discovery operation, by sending requests with in-
          creasing padding until there is no answer anymore, because one of the hosts on
          the path cannot handle the message.

                  The heartbeat serves two purposes. First, it assures the sender that the recipi-
          ent is still alive, even though there may not have been any activity over the under-
          lying TCP connection for a while. Second, the heartbeat generates activity across
          the connection during idle periods, which avoids closure by a firewall that does not
          tolerate idle connections.

                  The requirement for the exchange of a payload was designed into the Heartbeat
          protocol to support its use in a connectionless version of TLS known as Datagram
          Transport Layer Security (DTLS). Because a connectionless service is subject
          to packet loss, the payload enables the requestor to match response messages to
          request messages. For simplicity, the same version of the Heartbeat protocol is used
          with both TLS and DTLS. Thus, the payload is required for both TLS and DTLS.

         SSL/TLS ATTACKS

          Since the first introduction of SSL in 1994, and the subsequent standardization of
          TLS, numerous attacks have been devised against these protocols. The appearance
          of each attack has necessitated changes in the protocol, the encryption tools used, or
          some aspect of the implementation of SSL and TLS to counter these threats.

          ATTACK CATEGORIES We can group the attacks into four general categories:

              Attacks on the handshake protocol: As early as 1998, an approach to com-
                  promising the handshake protocol based on exploiting the formatting and
                  implementation of the RSA encryption scheme was presented [BLEI98]. As
                  countermeasures were implemented the attack was refined and adjusted to not
                  only thwart the countermeasures but also speed up the attack [e.g., BARD12].

              Attacks on the record and application data protocols: A number of vulnerabili-
                  ties have been discovered in these protocols, leading to patches to counter the
                  new threats. As a recent example, in 2011, researchers Thai Duong and Juliano
                  Rizzo demonstrated a proof of concept called BEAST (Browser Exploit Against
                  SSL/TLS) that turned what had been considered only a theoretical vulnerability
                                         17.2 / TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY 565

       into a practical attack [GOOD11]. BEAST leverages a type of cryptographic
       attack called a chosen-plaintext attack. The attacker mounts the attack by
       choosing a guess for the plaintext that is associated with a known ciphertext. The
       researchers developed a practical algorithm for launching successful attacks.
       Subsequent patches were able to thwart this attack. The authors of the BEAST
       attack are also the creators of the 2012 CRIME (Compression Ratio Info-leak
       Made Easy) attack, which can allow an attacker to recover the content of web
       cookies when data compression is used along with TLS [GOOD12]. When used
       to recover the content of secret authentication cookies, it allows an attacker to
       perform session hijacking on an authenticated web session.

    Attacks on the PKI: Checking the validity of X.509 certificates is an activity
       subject to a variety of attacks, both in the context of SSL/TLS and elsewhere.
       For example, [GEOR12] demonstrated that commonly used libraries for
       SSL/TLS suffer from vulnerable certificate validation implementations. The
       authors revealed weaknesses in the source code of OpenSSL, GnuTLS, JSSE,
       ApacheHttpClient, Weberknecht, cURL, PHP, Python and applications built
       upon or with these products.

    Other attacks: [MEYE13] lists a number of attacks that do not fit into any of
       the preceding categories. One example is an attack announced in 2011 by the
       German hacker group The Hackers Choice, which is a DoS attack [KUMA11].
       The attack creates a heavy processing load on a server by overwhelming the
       target with SSL/TLS handshake requests. Boosting system load is done by
       establishing new connections or using renegotiation. Assuming that the major-
       ity of computation during a handshake is done by the server, the attack creates
       more system load on the server than on the source device, leading to a DoS.
       The server is forced to continuously recompute random numbers and keys.

       The history of attacks and countermeasures for SSL/TLS is representative of
that for other Internet-based protocols. A "perfect" protocol and a "perfect" imple-
mentation strategy are never achieved. A constant back-and-forth between threats
and countermeasures determines the evolution of Internet-based protocols.

TLSv1.3

In 2014, the IETF TLS working group began work on a version 1.3 of TLS. The
primary aim is to improve the security of TLS. As of this writing, TLSv1.3 is still
in a draft stage, but the final standard is likely to be very close to the current draft.
Among the significant changes from version 1.2 are the following:

    TLSv1.3 removes support for a number of options and functions. Remov-
       ing code that implements functions no longer needed reduces the chances
       of potentially dangerous coding errors and reduces the attack surface. The
       deleted items include:

       ­Compression
       ­Ciphers that do not offer authenticated encryption
       ­Static RSA and DH key exchange
       ­32-bit timestamp as part of the Random parameter in the client_hello

          message
566 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                  ­Renegotiation
                  ­Change Cipher Spec Protocol
                  ­RC4
                  ­Use of MD5 and SHA-224 hashes with signatures
              TLSv1.3 uses Diffie­Hellman or Elliptic Curve Diffie­Hellman for key
                  exchange and does not permit RSA. The danger with RSA is that if the private
                  key is compromised, all handshakes using these cipher suites will be compro-
                  mised. With DH or ECDH, a new key is negotiated for each handshake.
              TLSv1.3 allows for a "1 round trip time" handshake by changing the order of
                  message sent with establishing a secure connection. The client sends a Client
                  Key Exchange message containing its cryptographic parameters for key estab-
                  lishment before a cipher suite has been negotiated. This enables a server
                  to calculate keys for encryption and authentication before sending its first
                  response. Reducing the number of packets sent during this handshake phase
                  speeds up the process and reduces the attack surface.

          These changes should improve the efficiency and security of TLS.

  17.3 HTTPS

          HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) refers to the combination of HTTP and SSL to imple-
          ment secure communication between a Web browser and a Web server. The HTTPS
          capability is built into all modern Web browsers. Its use depends on the Web server
          supporting HTTPS communication. For example, some search engines do not sup-
          port HTTPS.

                  The principal difference seen by a user of a Web browser is that URL (uniform
          resource locator) addresses begin with https:// rather than http://. A normal HTTP
          connection uses port 80. If HTTPS is specified, port 443 is used, which invokes SSL.

                  When HTTPS is used, the following elements of the communication are
          encrypted:

              URL of the requested document
              Contents of the document
              Contents of browser forms (filled in by browser user)
              Cookies sent from browser to server and from server to browser
              Contents of HTTP header

                  HTTPS is documented in RFC 2818, HTTP Over TLS. There is no fundamen-
          tal change in using HTTP over either SSL or TLS, and both implementations are
          referred to as HTTPS.

         Connection Initiation

          For HTTPS, the agent acting as the HTTP client also acts as the TLS client. The
          client initiates a connection to the server on the appropriate port and then sends
          the TLS ClientHello to begin the TLS handshake. When the TLS handshake has
                                                            17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 567

        finished, the client may then initiate the first HTTP request. All HTTP data is to be
        sent as TLS application data. Normal HTTP behavior, including retained connec-
        tions, should be followed.

               There are three levels of awareness of a connection in HTTPS. At the HTTP
        level, an HTTP client requests a connection to an HTTP server by sending a con-
        nection request to the next lowest layer. Typically, the next lowest layer is TCP,
        but it also may be TLS/SSL. At the level of TLS, a session is established between a
        TLS client and a TLS server. This session can support one or more connections at
        any time. As we have seen, a TLS request to establish a connection begins with the
        establishment of a TCP connection between the TCP entity on the client side and
        the TCP entity on the server side.

      Connection Closure

        An HTTP client or server can indicate the closing of a connection by including the
        following line in an HTTP record: Connection: close. This indicates that the
        connection will be closed after this record is delivered.

               The closure of an HTTPS connection requires that TLS close the connec-
        tion with the peer TLS entity on the remote side, which will involve closing the
        underlying TCP connection. At the TLS level, the proper way to close a connec-
        tion is for each side to use the TLS alert protocol to send a close_notify alert.
        TLS implementations must initiate an exchange of closure alerts before closing a
        connection. A TLS implementation may, after sending a closure alert, close the
        connection without waiting for the peer to send its closure alert, generating an
        "incomplete close". Note that an implementation that does this may choose to
        reuse the session. This should only be done when the application knows (typically
        through detecting HTTP message boundaries) that it has received all the message
        data that it cares about.

               HTTP clients also must be able to cope with a situation in which the underlying
        TCP connection is terminated without a prior close_notify alert and without a
        Connection: close indicator. Such a situation could be due to a programming
        error on the server or a communication error that causes the TCP connection to drop.
        However, the unannounced TCP closure could be evidence of some sort of attack. So
        the HTTPS client should issue some sort of security warning when this occurs.

17.4 SECURE SHELL (SSH)

        Secure Shell (SSH) is a protocol for secure network communications designed to
        be relatively simple and inexpensive to implement. The initial version, SSH1 was
        focused on providing a secure remote logon facility to replace TELNET and other
        remote logon schemes that provided no security. SSH also provides a more general
        client/server capability and can be used for such network functions as file transfer and
        email. A new version, SSH2, fixes a number of security flaws in the original scheme.
        SSH2 is documented as a proposed standard in IETF RFCs 4250 through 4256.

               SSH client and server applications are widely available for most operating
        systems. It has become the method of choice for remote login and X tunneling and
568 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

SSH User                                   SSH

Authentication Protocol Connection Protocol

Authenticates the client-side Multiplexes the encrypted
                     tunnel into several logical
user to the server.
                     channels.

SSH Transport Layer Protocol

Provides server authentication, confidentiality, and integrity.
It may optionally also provide compression.

                             TCP

Transmission control protocol provides reliable, connection-
oriented end-to-end delivery.

                              IP

Internet protocol provides datagram delivery across
multiple networks.

                                                 Figure 17.8 SSH Protocol Stack

                         is rapidly becoming one of the most pervasive applications for encryption technol-
                         ogy outside of embedded systems.

                                SSH is organized as three protocols that typically run on top of TCP
                         (Figure 17.8):

                             Transport Layer Protocol: Provides server authentication, data confidentiality,
                                and data integrity with forward secrecy (i.e., if a key is compromised during
                                one session, the knowledge does not affect the security of earlier sessions). The
                                transport layer may optionally provide compression.

                             User Authentication Protocol: Authenticates the user to the server.
                             Connection Protocol: Multiplexes multiple logical communications channels

                                over a single, underlying SSH connection.

                    Transport Layer Protocol

                         HOST KEYS Server authentication occurs at the transport layer, based on the server
                         possessing a public/private key pair. A server may have multiple host keys using
                         multiple different asymmetric encryption algorithms. Multiple hosts may share
                         the same host key. In any case, the server host key is used during key exchange to
                         authenticate the identity of the host. For this to be possible, the client must have a
                         priori knowledge of the server's public host key. RFC 4251 dictates two alternative
                         trust models that can be used:

                            1. The client has a local database that associates each host name (as typed by the
                                user) with the corresponding public host key. This method requires no centrally
                                administered infrastructure and no third-party coordination. The downside is that
                                the database of name-to-key associations may become burdensome to maintain.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                                     17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 569

   2. The host name-to-key association is certified by a trusted certification author-
       ity (CA). The client only knows the CA root key and can verify the validity of
       all host keys certified by accepted CAs. This alternative eases the maintenance
       problem, since ideally, only a single CA key needs to be securely stored on the
       client. On the other hand, each host key must be appropriately certified by a
       central authority before authorization is possible.

PACKET EXCHANGE Figure 17.9 illustrates the sequence of events in the SSH
Transport Layer Protocol. First, the client establishes a TCP connection to the
server. This is done via the TCP protocol and is not part of the Transport Layer
Protocol. Once the connection is established, the client and server exchange data,
referred to as packets, in the data field of a TCP segment. Each packet is in the
following format (Figure 17.10).

    Packet length: Length of the packet in bytes, not including the packet length
       and MAC fields.

    Padding length: Length of the random padding field.

    Payload: Useful contents of the packet. Prior to algorithm negotiation, this
       field is uncompressed. If compression is negotiated, then in subsequent
       packets, this field is compressed.

                       Client                      Server

Identification string      Establish TCP Connection
             exchange  SSH-protoversion-softwareversion
                       SSH-protoversion-softwareversion
           Algorithm
          negotiation        SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
                             SSH_MSG_KEXINIT

        End of                       Key Exchange
key exchange                   SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS
                               SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS

Service                SSH_MSG_SERVICE_REQUEST
request

Figure 17.9 SSH Transport Layer Protocol Packet Exchanges
570 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                                                                            Payload

                 COMPRESS

seq #  pktl pdl  Compressed payload                                                  Padding

                 ENCRYPT                                                                      MAC

                                                             Ciphertext

                                                                SSH Packet

                      pktl = packet length
                      pdl = padding length
            Figure 17.10 SSH Transport Layer Protocol Packet Formation

    Random padding: Once an encryption algorithm has been negotiated, this
       field is added. It contains random bytes of padding so that the total length of
       the packet (excluding the MAC field) is a multiple of the cipher block size, or
       8 bytes for a stream cipher.

    Message authentication code (MAC): If message authentication has been
       negotiated, this field contains the MAC value. The MAC value is computed
       over the entire packet plus a sequence number, excluding the MAC field. The
       sequence number is an implicit 32-bit packet sequence that is initialized to
       zero for the first packet and incremented for every packet. The sequence num-
       ber is not included in the packet sent over the TCP connection.

       Once an encryption algorithm has been negotiated, the entire packet
(excluding the MAC field) is encrypted after the MAC value is calculated.

       The SSH Transport Layer packet exchange consists of a sequence of steps
(Figure 17.9). The first step, the identification string exchange, begins with the client
sending a packet with an identification string of the form:

       SSH-protoversion-softwareversion SP comments CR LF
                                                     17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 571

where SP,CR, and LF are space character, carriage return, and line feed, respec-
tively. An example of a valid string is SSH-2.0-billsSSH_3.6.3q3<CR><LF>.
The server responds with its own identification string. These strings are used in the
Diffie­Hellman key exchange.

       Next comes algorithm negotiation. Each side sends an SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
containing lists of supported algorithms in the order of preference to the sender.
There is one list for each type of cryptographic algorithm. The algorithms include
key exchange, encryption, MAC algorithm, and compression algorithm. Table 17.3
shows the allowable options for encryption, MAC, and compression. For each cat-
egory, the algorithm chosen is the first algorithm on the client's list that is also sup-
ported by the server.

       The next step is key exchange. The specification allows for alternative meth-
ods of key exchange, but at present, only two versions of Diffie­Hellman key
exchange are specified. Both versions are defined in RFC 2409 and require only one
packet in each direction. The following steps are involved in the exchange. In this,
C is the client; S is the server; p is a large safe prime; g is a generator for a subgroup
of GF(p); q is the order of the subgroup; V_S is S's identification string; V_C is

Table 17.3 SSH Transport Layer Cryptographic Algorithms

                  Cipher                                   MAC algorithm
                    Three-key 3DES in CBC
3des-cbc*           mode                      hmac-sha1*      HMAC-SHA1; digest
blowfish-cbc                                                  length = key length = 20
                    Blowfish in CBC mode
                                              hmac-sha1-96**  First 96 bits of HMAC-
                                                              SHA1; digest length = 12;
                                                              key length = 20

twofish256-cbc    Twofish in CBC mode with    hmac-md5        HMAC-MD5; digest
twofish192-cbc    a 256-bit key                               length = key length = 16

                  Twofish with a 192-bit key  hmac-md5-96     First 96 bits of
                                                              HMAC-MD5;
twofish128-cbc    Twofish with a 128-bit key                  digest length = 12;
aes256-cbc        AES in CBC mode with a                      key length = 16
                  256-bit key
aes192-cbc        AES with a 192-bit key      none*      Compression algorithm
aes128-cbc**      AES with a 128-bit key      zlib                     No compression

                                                                       Defined in RFC 1950 and
                                                                       RFC 1951

Serpent256-cbc    Serpent in CBC mode with
                  a 256-bit key
Serpent192-cbc    Serpent with a 192-bit key
Serpent128-cbc    Serpent with a 128-bit key
arcfour           RC4 with a 128-bit key
cast128-cbc       CAST-128 in CBC mode
* = Required
** = Recommended
572 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

          C's identification string; K_S is S's public host key; I_C is C's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
          message and I_S is S's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message that have been exchanged
          before this part begins. The values of p, g, and q are known to both client and server
          as a result of the algorithm selection negotiation. The hash function hash() is also
          decided during algorithm negotiation.

              1. C generates a random number x(1 6 x 6 q) and computes e = gx mod p. C
                  sends e to S.

              2. S generates a random number y(0 6 y 6 q) and computes f = gy mod p.
                  S receives e.It computes K = ey mod p, H = hash(V_C ` V_S ` I_C ` I_S ` K_S `
                  e ` f ` K), and signature s on H with its private host key. S sends (K_S ` f ` s)
                  to C. The signing operation may involve a second hashing operation.

              3. C verifies that K_S really is the host key for S (e.g., using certificates or a local
                  database). C is also allowed to accept the key without verification; however,
                  doing so will render the protocol insecure against active attacks (but may be
                  desirable for practical reasons in the short term in many environments). C then
                  computes K = f x mod p, H = hash(V_C ` V_S ` I_C ` I_S ` K_S ` e ` f ` K), and
                  verifies the signature s on H.

                  As a result of these steps, the two sides now share a master key K. In addition,
          the server has been authenticated to the client, because the server has used its pri-
          vate key to sign its half of the Diffie-Hellman exchange. Finally, the hash value H
          serves as a session identifier for this connection. Once computed, the session identi-
          fier is not changed, even if the key exchange is performed again for this connection
          to obtain fresh keys.

                  The end of key exchange is signaled by the exchange of SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS
          packets. At this point, both sides may start using the keys generated from K, as dis-
          cussed subsequently.

                  The final step is service request. The client sends an SSH_MSG_SERVICE_
          REQUEST packet to request either the User Authentication or the Connection
          Protocol. Subsequent to this, all data is exchanged as the payload of an SSH
          Transport Layer packet, protected by encryption and MAC.

          KEY GENERATION The keys used for encryption and MAC (and any needed IVs)
          are generated from the shared secret key K, the hash value from the key exchange
          H, and the session identifier, which is equal to H unless there has been a subsequent
          key exchange after the initial key exchange. The values are computed as follows.

              Initial IV client to server: HASH(K ` H ` ;A< ` session_id)

              Initial IV server to client: HASH(K ` H ` ;B< ` session_id)

              Encryption key client to server: HASH(K ` H ` ;C< ` session_id)

              Encryption key server to client: HASH(K ` H ` ;D< ` session_id)

              Integrity key client to server: HASH(K ` H ` ;E< ` session_id)

              Integrity key server to client: HASH(K ` H ` ;F< ` session_id)

          where HASH() is the hash function determined during algorithm negotiation.
           17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 573

User Authentication Protocol

The User Authentication Protocol provides the means by which the client is
authenticated to the server.

MESSAGE TYPES AND FORMATS Three types of messages are always used in the User
Authentication Protocol. Authentication requests from the client have the format:

byte       SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST (50)
string     user name
string     service name
string     method name
...        method specific fields

where user name is the authorization identity the client is claiming, service
name is the facility to which the client is requesting access (typically the SSH
Connection Protocol), and method name is the authentication method being
used in this request. The first byte has decimal value 50, which is interpreted as
SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST.

       If the server either (1) rejects the authentication request or (2) accepts the
request but requires one or more additional authentication methods, the server
sends a message with the format:

byte       SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE (51)
name-list  authentications that can continue
boolean    partial success

where the name-list is a list of methods that may productively continue the dialog.
If the server accepts authentication, it sends a single byte message: SSH_MSG_
USERAUTH_SUCCESS (52).

MESSAGE EXCHANGE The message exchange involves the following steps.

   1. The client sends a SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST with a requested method
       of none.

   2. The server checks to determine if the user name is valid. If not, the server
       returns SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE with the partial success value of
       false. If the user name is valid, the server proceeds to step 3.

   3. The server returns SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE with a list of one or more
       authentication methods to be used.

   4. The client selects one of the acceptable authentication methods and sends a
       SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST with that method name and the required
       method-specific fields. At this point, there may be a sequence of exchanges to
       perform the method.
574 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

              5. If the authentication succeeds and more authentication methods are required,
                  the server proceeds to step 3, using a partial success value of true. If the
                  authentication fails, the server proceeds to step 3, using a partial success value
                  of false.

              6. When all required authentication methods succeed, the server sends a
                  SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_SUCCESS message, and the Authentication Protocol
                  is over.

          AUTHENTICATION METHODS The server may require one or more of the following
          authentication methods.

              publickey: The details of this method depend on the public-key algorithm
                  chosen. In essence, the client sends a message to the server that contains
                  the client's public key, with the message signed by the client's private key.
                  When the server receives this message, it checks whether the supplied key
                  is acceptable for authentication and, if so, it checks whether the signature is
                  correct.

              password: The client sends a message containing a plaintext password,
                  which is protected by encryption by the Transport Layer Protocol.

              hostbased: Authentication is performed on the client's host rather than the
                  client itself. Thus, a host that supports multiple clients would provide authen-
                  tication for all its clients. This method works by having the client send a signa-
                  ture created with the private key of the client host. Thus, rather than directly
                  verifying the user's identity, the SSH server verifies the identity of the client
                  host--and then believes the host when it says the user has already authenti-
                  cated on the client side.

         Connection Protocol

          The SSH Connection Protocol runs on top of the SSH Transport Layer Protocol
          and assumes that a secure authentication connection is in use.2 That secure authen-
          tication connection, referred to as a tunnel, is used by the Connection Protocol to
          multiplex a number of logical channels.

          CHANNEL MECHANISM All types of communication using SSH, such as a terminal
          session, are supported using separate channels. Either side may open a channel.
          For each channel, each side associates a unique channel number, which need not be
          the same on both ends. Channels are flow controlled using a window mechanism.
          No data may be sent to a channel until a message is received to indicate that window
          space is available.

             2RFC 4254, The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection Protocol, states that the Connection Protocol runs on
             top of the Transport Layer Protocol and the User Authentication Protocol. RFC 4251, SSH Protocol
             Architecture, states that the Connection Protocol runs over the User Authentication Protocol. In fact, the
             Connection Protocol runs over the Transport Layer Protocol, but assumes that the User Authentication
             Protocol has been previously invoked.
                                                     17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 575

       The life of a channel progresses through three stages: opening a channel, data
transfer, and closing a channel.

       When either side wishes to open a new channel, it allocates a local number for
the channel and then sends a message of the form:

byte    SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN
string  channel type
uint32  sender channel
uint32  initial window size
uint32  maximum packet size
....    channel type specific data follows

where uint32 means unsigned 32-bit integer. The channel type identifies the appli-
cation for this channel, as described subsequently. The sender channel is the local
channel number. The initial window size specifies how many bytes of channel data
can be sent to the sender of this message without adjusting the window. The maxi-
mum packet size specifies the maximum size of an individual data packet that can
be sent to the sender. For example, one might want to use smaller packets for inter-
active connections to get better interactive response on slow links.

       If the remote side is able to open the channel, it returns a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_
OPEN_CONFIRMATION message, which includes the sender channel number, the
recipient channel number, and window and packet size values for incoming traffic.
Otherwise, the remote side returns a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN_FAILURE
message with a reason code indicating the reason for failure.

       Once a channel is open, data transfer is performed using a SSH_MSG_
CHANNEL_DATA message, which includes the recipient channel number and a block
of data. These messages, in both directions, may continue as long as the channel
is open.

       When either side wishes to close a channel, it sends a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_
CLOSE message, which includes the recipient channel number.

       Figure 17.11 provides an example of Connection Protocol Message Exchange.

CHANNEL TYPES Four channel types are recognized in the SSH Connection Protocol
specification.

    session: The remote execution of a program. The program may be a shell, an
       application such as file transfer or email, a system command, or some built-in
       subsystem. Once a session channel is opened, subsequent requests are used to
       start the remote program.

    x11: This refers to the X Window System, a computer software system and
       network protocol that provides a graphical user interface (GUI) for net-
       worked computers. X allows applications to run on a network server but to be
       displayed on a desktop machine.
576 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY                  Server

                                                   Client

          Establish Authenticated Transport Layer Connection

Open a                 SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN
channel   SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN_CONFIRMATION

          SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA
          SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA

   Data
transfer

          SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA
          SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA

Close a   SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_CLOSE
channel

Figure 17.11 Example of SSH Connection Protocol Message Exchange

    forwarded-tcpip: This is remote port forwarding, as explained in the next
       subsection.

    direct-tcpip: This is local port forwarding, as explained in the next subsection.

PORT FORWARDING One of the most useful features of SSH is port forwarding. In
essence, port forwarding provides the ability to convert any insecure TCP connec-
tion into a secure SSH connection. This is also referred to as SSH tunneling. We
need to know what a port is in this context. A port is an identifier of a user of
TCP. So, any application that runs on top of TCP has a port number. Incoming TCP
traffic is delivered to the appropriate application on the basis of the port number.
An application may employ multiple port numbers. For example, for the Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), the server side generally listens on port 25, so an
                                                     17.4 / SECURE SHELL (SSH) 577

incoming SMTP request uses TCP and addresses the data to destination port 25.
TCP recognizes that this is the SMTP server address and routes the data to the
SMTP server application.

       Figure 17.12 illustrates the basic concept behind port forwarding. We have
a client application that is identified by port number x and a server application
identified by port number y. At some point, the client application invokes the local
TCP entity and requests a connection to the remote server on port y. The local
TCP entity negotiates a TCP connection with the remote TCP entity, such that the
connection links local port x to remote port y.

       To secure this connection, SSH is configured so that the SSH Transport Layer
Protocol establishes a TCP connection between the SSH client and server entities,
with TCP port numbers a and b, respectively. A secure SSH tunnel is established

                  Client                                       Server

   Client                  Unsecure TCP connection               Server
application                                                    application
                          (a) Connection via TCP
        x                                                        y
   TCP                                                            TCP
   entity                                                         entity

   Client                        Secure SSH tunnel               Server
application               Unsecure TCP connection              application

        x                                                        y
   SSH                                                            SSH
   entity                                                         entity

        a                                                        b
   TCP                                                            TCP
   entity                                                         entity

                                (b) Connection via SSH tunnel
Figure 17.12 SSH Transport Layer Packet Exchanges

Hiva-Network.Com
578 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

          over this TCP connection. Traffic from the client at port x is redirected to the local
          SSH entity and travels through the tunnel where the remote SSH entity delivers the
          data to the server application on port y. Traffic in the other direction is similarly
          redirected.

                  SSH supports two types of port forwarding: local forwarding and remote for-
          warding. Local forwarding allows the client to set up a "hijacker" process. This will
          intercept selected application-level traffic and redirect it from an unsecured TCP
          connection to a secure SSH tunnel. SSH is configured to listen on selected ports.
          SSH grabs all traffic using a selected port and sends it through an SSH tunnel. On
          the other end, the SSH server sends the incoming traffic to the destination port dic-
          tated by the client application.

                  The following example should help clarify local forwarding. Suppose you have
          an email client on your desktop and use it to get email from your mail server via the
          Post Office Protocol (POP). The assigned port number for POP3 is port 110. We
          can secure this traffic in the following way:

              1. The SSH client sets up a connection to the remote server.

              2. Select an unused local port number, say 9999, and configure SSH to accept
                  traffic from this port destined for port 110 on the server.

              3. The SSH client informs the SSH server to create a connection to the destina-
                  tion, in this case mailserver port 110.

              4. The client takes any bits sent to local port 9999 and sends them to the server
                  inside the encrypted SSH session. The SSH server decrypts the incoming bits
                  and sends the plaintext to port 110.

              5. In the other direction, the SSH server takes any bits received on port 110 and
                  sends them inside the SSH session back to the client, who decrypts and sends
                  them to the process connected to port 9999.

                  With remote forwarding, the user's SSH client acts on the server's behalf.
          The client receives traffic with a given destination port number, places the traf-
          fic on the correct port and sends it to the destination the user chooses. A typical
          example of remote forwarding is the following. You wish to access a server at
          work from your home computer. Because the work server is behind a firewall, it
          will not accept an SSH request from your home computer. However, from work
          you can set up an SSH tunnel using remote forwarding. This involves the follow-
          ing steps.

              1. From the work computer, set up an SSH connection to your home computer.
                  The firewall will allow this, because it is a protected outgoing connection.

              2. Configure the SSH server to listen on a local port, say 22, and to deliver data
                  across the SSH connection addressed to remote port, say 2222.

              3. You can now go to your home computer, and configure SSH to accept traffic
                  on port 2222.

              4. You now have an SSH tunnel that can be used for remote logon to the work
                  server.
                            17.5 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 579
  17.5 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms

Alert protocol               HTTPS (HTTP over SSL)  Secure Socket Layer (SSL)
Change Cipher Spec protocol  Master Secret          Transport Layer Security
Handshake protocol           Secure Shell (SSH)
                                                        (TLS)

Review Questions

 17.1  What are the advantages of each of the three approaches shown in Figure 17.1?
 17.2  What protocols comprise TLS?
 17.3  What is the difference between a TLS connection and a TLS session?
 17.4  List and briefly define the parameters that define a TLS session state.
 17.5  List and briefly define the parameters that define a TLS session connection.
 17.6  What services are provided by the TLS Record Protocol?
 17.7  What steps are involved in the TLS Record Protocol transmission?
 17.8  Give brief details about different level of awareness of a connection in HTTPS.
 17.9  Which protocol was replaced by SSH and why? Which version is currently in the pro-
       cess of being standardized?
17.10  List and briefly define the SSH protocols.

Problems

 17.1 In SSL and TLS, why is there a separate Change Cipher Spec Protocol rather than
          including a change_cipher_spec message in the Handshake Protocol?

 17.2 What purpose does the MAC serve during the change cipher spec TLS exchange?

 17.3 Consider the following threats to Web security and describe how each is countered by
          a particular feature of TLS.
          a. Brute-Force Cryptanalytic Attack: An exhaustive search of the key space for a
              conventional encryption algorithm.
          b. Known Plaintext Dictionary Attack: Many messages will contain predictable
              plaintext, such as the HTTP GET command. An attacker constructs a diction-
              ary containing every possible encryption of the known-plaintext message. When
              an encrypted message is intercepted, the attacker takes the portion containing
              the encrypted known plaintext and looks up the ciphertext in the dictionary. The
              ciphertext should match against an entry that was encrypted with the same secret
              key. If there are several matches, each of these can be tried against the full cipher-
              text to determine the right one. This attack is especially effective against small key
              sizes (e.g., 40-bit keys).
          c. Replay Attack: Earlier TLS handshake messages are replayed.
          d. Man-in-the-Middle Attack: An attacker interposes during key exchange, acting as
              the client to the server and as the server to the client.
          e. Password Sniffing: Passwords in HTTP or other application traffic are eaves-
              dropped.
          f. IP Spoofing: Uses forged IP addresses to fool a host into accepting bogus data.
580 CHAPTER 17 / TRANSPORT-LEVEL SECURITY

                      g. IP Hijacking: An active, authenticated connection between two hosts is disrupted
                          and the attacker takes the place of one of the hosts.

                      h. SYN Flooding: An attacker sends TCP SYN messages to request a connection
                          but does not respond to the final message to establish the connection fully. The
                          attacked TCP module typically leaves the "half-open connection" around for a few
                          minutes. Repeated SYN messages can clog the TCP module.

             17.4 Based on what you have learned in this chapter, is it possible in TLS for the receiver
                      to reorder TLS record blocks that arrive out of order? If so, explain how it can be
                      done. If not, why not?

             17.5 For SSH packets, what is the advantage, if any, of not including the MAC in the scope
                      of the packet encryption?
                           CHAPTER

Wireless Network Security

          18.1 Wireless Security
                          Wireless Network Threats
                          Wireless Security Measures

          18.2 Mobile Device Security
                          Security Threats
                          Mobile Device Security Strategy

          18.3 IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN Overview
                          The Wi-Fi Alliance
                          IEEE 802 Protocol Architecture
                          IEEE 802.11 Network Components and Architectural Model
                          IEEE 802.11 Services

          18.4 IEEE 802.11i Wireless LAN Security
                          IEEE 802.11i Services
                          IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation
                          Discovery Phase
                          Authentication Phase
                          Key Management Phase
                          Protected Data Transfer Phase
                          The IEEE 802.11i Pseudorandom Function

          18.5 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                                                                               581
582 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                              LEARNING OBJECTIVES

            After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
             Present an overview of security threats and countermeasures for wireless

                 networks.
             Understand the unique security threats posed by the use of mobile devices

                 with enterprise networks.
             Describe the principal elements in a mobile device security strategy.
             Understand the essential elements of the IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN

                 standard.
             Summarize the various components of the IEEE 802.11i wireless LAN

                 security architecture.

          This chapter begins with a general overview of wireless security issues. We then focus
          on the relatively new area of mobile device security, examining threats and counter-
          measures for mobile devices used in the enterprise. Then, we look at the IEEE 802.11i
          standard for wireless LAN security. This standard is part of IEEE 802.11, also referred
          to as Wi-Fi. We begin the discussion with an overview of IEEE 802.11, and then we
          look in some detail at IEEE 802.11i.

  18.1 WIRELESS SECURITY

          Wireless networks, and the wireless devices that use them, introduce a host of secu-
          rity problems over and above those found in wired networks. Some of the key fac-
          tors contributing to the higher security risk of wireless networks compared to wired
          networks include the following [MA10]:

              Channel: Wireless networking typically involves broadcast communications,
                  which is far more susceptible to eavesdropping and jamming than wired
                  networks. Wireless networks are also more vulnerable to active attacks that
                  exploit vulnerabilities in communications protocols.

              Mobility: Wireless devices are, in principal and usually in practice, far more
                  portable and mobile than wired devices. This mobility results in a number of
                  risks, described subsequently.

              Resources: Some wireless devices, such as smartphones and tablets, have
                  sophisticated operating systems but limited memory and processing resources
                  with which to counter threats, including denial of service and malware.

              Accessibility: Some wireless devices, such as sensors and robots, may be left
                  unattended in remote and/or hostile locations. This greatly increases their
                  vulnerability to physical attacks.
                           18.1 / WIRELESS SECURITY 583

Endpoint  Wireless medium                   Access point

Figure 18.1 Wireless Networking Components

       In simple terms, the wireless environment consists of three components that
provide point of attack (Figure 18.1). The wireless client can be a cell phone, a
Wi-Fi­enabled laptop or tablet, a wireless sensor, a Bluetooth device, and so on.
The wireless access point provides a connection to the network or service. Examples
of access points are cell towers, Wi-Fi hotspots, and wireless access points to wired
local or wide area networks. The transmission medium, which carries the radio
waves for data transfer, is also a source of vulnerability.

Wireless Network Threats

[CHOI08] lists the following security threats to wireless networks:

    Accidental association: Company wireless LANs or wireless access points to
       wired LANs in close proximity (e.g., in the same or neighboring buildings)
       may create overlapping transmission ranges. A user intending to connect to
       one LAN may unintentionally lock on to a wireless access point from a neigh-
       boring network. Although the security breach is accidental, it nevertheless
       exposes resources of one LAN to the accidental user.

    Malicious association: In this situation, a wireless device is configured to
       appear to be a legitimate access point, enabling the operator to steal pass-
       words from legitimate users and then penetrate a wired network through a
       legitimate wireless access point.

    Ad hoc networks: These are peer-to-peer networks between wireless comput-
       ers with no access point between them. Such networks can pose a security
       threat due to a lack of a central point of control.

    Nontraditional networks: Nontraditional networks and links, such as personal
       network Bluetooth devices, barcode readers, and handheld PDAs, pose a secu-
       rity risk in terms of both eavesdropping and spoofing.

    Identity theft (MAC spoofing): This occurs when an attacker is able to eaves-
       drop on network traffic and identify the MAC address of a computer with
       network privileges.

    Man-in-the middle attacks: This type of attack is described in Chapter 10 in
       the context of the Diffie­Hellman key exchange protocol. In a broader sense,
       this attack involves persuading a user and an access point to believe that they
       are talking to each other when in fact the communication is going through an
       intermediate attacking device. Wireless networks are particularly vulnerable
       to such attacks.
584 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

              Denial of service (DoS): This type of attack is discussed in detail in Chapter
                  21. In the context of a wireless network, a DoS attack occurs when an attacker
                  continually bombards a wireless access point or some other accessible wireless
                  port with various protocol messages designed to consume system resources.
                  The wireless environment lends itself to this type of attack, because it is so
                  easy for the attacker to direct multiple wireless messages at the target.

              Network injection: A network injection attack targets wireless access points
                  that are exposed to nonfiltered network traffic, such as routing protocol mes-
                  sages or network management messages. An example of such an attack is
                  one in which bogus reconfiguration commands are used to affect routers and
                  switches to degrade network performance.

         Wireless Security Measures

          Following [CHOI08], we can group wireless security measures into those dealing
          with wireless transmissions, wireless access points, and wireless networks (consist-
          ing of wireless routers and endpoints).

          SECURING WIRELESS TRANSMISSIONS The principal threats to wireless transmission
          are eavesdropping, altering or inserting messages, and disruption. To deal with
          eavesdropping, two types of countermeasures are appropriate:

              Signal-hiding techniques: Organizations can take a number of measures to
                  make it more difficult for an attacker to locate their wireless access points,
                  including turning off service set identifier (SSID) broadcasting by wireless
                  access points; assigning cryptic names to SSIDs; reducing signal strength to the
                  lowest level that still provides requisite coverage; and locating wireless access
                  points in the interior of the building, away from windows and exterior walls.
                  Greater security can be achieved by the use of directional antennas and of
                  signal-shielding techniques.

              Encryption: Encryption of all wireless transmission is effective against eaves-
                  dropping to the extent that the encryption keys are secured.

                  The use of encryption and authentication protocols is the standard method of
          countering attempts to alter or insert transmissions.

                  The methods discussed in Chapter 21 for dealing with DoS apply to wireless
          transmissions. Organizations can also reduce the risk of unintentional DoS attacks.
          Site surveys can detect the existence of other devices using the same frequency
          range, to help determine where to locate wireless access points. Signal strengths can
          be adjusted and shielding used in an attempt to isolate a wireless environment from
          competing nearby transmissions.

          SECURING WIRELESS ACCESS POINTS The main threat involving wireless access
          points is unauthorized access to the network. The principal approach for preventing
          such access is the IEEE 802.1X standard for port-based network access control. The
          standard provides an authentication mechanism for devices wishing to attach to a
          LAN or wireless network. The use of 802.1X can prevent rogue access points and
          other unauthorized devices from becoming insecure backdoors.

                  Section 16.3 provides an introduction to 802.1X.
                                                     18.2 / MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY 585

        SECURING WIRELESS NETWORKS [CHOI08] recommends the following techniques
        for wireless network security:

           1. Use encryption. Wireless routers are typically equipped with built-in encryp-
               tion mechanisms for router-to-router traffic.

           2. Use antivirus and antispyware software, and a firewall. These facilities should
               be enabled on all wireless network endpoints.

           3. Turn off identifier broadcasting. Wireless routers are typically configured to
               broadcast an identifying signal so that any device within range can learn of
               the router's existence. If a network is configured so that authorized devices
               know the identity of routers, this capability can be disabled, so as to thwart
               attackers.

           4. Change the identifier on your router from the default. Again, this measure
               thwarts attackers who will attempt to gain access to a wireless network using
               default router identifiers.

           5. Change your router's pre-set password for administration. This is another
               prudent step.

           6. Allow only specific computers to access your wireless network. A router can
               be configured to only communicate with approved MAC addresses. Of course,
               MAC addresses can be spoofed, so this is just one element of a security strategy.

18.2 MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY

        Prior to the widespread use of smartphones, the dominant paradigm for computer
        and network security in organizations was as follows. Corporate IT was tightly con-
        trolled. User devices were typically limited to Windows PCs. Business applications
        were controlled by IT and either run locally on endpoints or on physical servers
        in data centers. Network security was based upon clearly defined perimeters that
        separated trusted internal networks from the untrusted Internet. Today, there have
        been massive changes in each of these assumptions. An organization's networks
        must accommodate the following:

            Growing use of new devices: Organizations are experiencing significant growth
               in employee use of mobile devices. In many cases, employees are allowed to
               use a combination of endpoint devices as part of their day-to-day activities.

            Cloud-based applications: Applications no longer run solely on physical
               servers in corporate data centers. Quite the opposite, applications can run
               anywhere--on traditional physical servers, on mobile virtual servers, or in the
               cloud. Additionally, end users can now take advantage of a wide variety of
               cloud-based applications and IT services for personal and professional use.
               Facebook can be used for an employee's personal profiles or as a component
               of a corporate marketing campaign. Employees depend upon Skype to speak
               with friends abroad or for legitimate business video conferencing. Dropbox
               and Box can be used to distribute documents between corporate and personal
               devices for mobility and user productivity.
           586 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                             De-perimeterization: Given new device proliferation, application mobility,
                                and cloud-based consumer and corporate services, the notion of a static net-
                                work perimeter is all but gone. Now there are a multitude of network perim-
                                eters around devices, applications, users, and data. These perimeters have also
                                become quite dynamic as they must adapt to various environmental conditions
                                such as user role, device type, server virtualization mobility, network location,
                                and time-of-day.

                             External business requirements: The enterprise must also provide guests,
                                third-party contractors, and business partners network access using various
                                devices from a multitude of locations.

                                The central element in all of these changes is the mobile computing device.
                         Mobile devices have become an essential element for organizations as part of the
                         overall network infrastructure. Mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets, and
                         memory sticks provide increased convenience for individuals as well as the poten-
                         tial for increased productivity in the workplace. Because of their widespread use
                         and unique characteristics, security for mobile devices is a pressing and complex
                         issue. In essence, an organization needs to implement a security policy through a
                         combination of security features built into the mobile devices and additional secu-
                         rity controls provided by network components that regulate the use of the mobile
                         devices.

                    Security Threats

                         Mobile devices need additional, specialized protection measures beyond those
                         implemented for other client devices, such as desktop and laptop devices that are
                         used only within the organization's facilities and on the organization's networks.
                         SP 800-14 (Guidelines for Managing and Securing Mobile Devices in the Enterprise,
                         July 2012) lists seven major security concerns for mobile devices. We examine each
                         of these in turn.

                         LACK OF PHYSICAL SECURITY CONTROLS Mobile devices are typically under the com-
                         plete control of the user, and are used and kept in a variety of locations outside the
                         organization's control, including off premises. Even if a device is required to remain
                         on premises, the user may move the device within the organization between secure
                         and nonsecured locations. Thus, theft and tampering are realistic threats.

                                The security policy for mobile devices must be based on the assumption that
                         any mobile device may be stolen or at least accessed by a malicious party. The threat
                         is twofold: A malicious party may attempt to recover sensitive data from the device
                         itself, or may use the device to gain access to the organization's resources.

                         USE OF UNTRUSTED MOBILE DEVICES In addition to company-issued and company-
                         controlled mobile devices, virtually all employees will have personal smartphones
                         and/or tablets. The organization must assume that these devices are not trustworthy.
                         That is, the devices may not employ encryption and either the user or a third party
                         may have installed a bypass to the built-in restrictions on security, operating system
                         use, and so on.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                              18.2 / MOBILE DEVICE SECURITY 587

USE OF UNTRUSTED NETWORKS If a mobile device is used on premises, it can connect
to organization resources over the organization's own in-house wireless networks.
However, for off-premises use, the user will typically access organizational resources
via Wi-Fi or cellular access to the Internet and from the Internet to the organiza-
tion. Thus, traffic that includes an off-premises segment is potentially susceptible to
eavesdropping or man-in-the-middle types of attacks. Thus, the security policy must
be based on the assumption that the networks between the mobile device and the
organization are not trustworthy.

USE OF APPLICATIONS CREATED BY UNKNOWN PARTIES By design, it is easy to find
and install third-party applications on mobile devices. This poses the obvious risk of
installing malicious software. An organization has several options for dealing with
this threat, as described subsequently.

INTERACTION WITH OTHER SYSTEMS A common feature found on smartphones and
tablets is the ability to automatically synchronize data, apps, contacts, photos, and
so on with other computing devices and with cloud-based storage. Unless an orga-
nization has control of all the devices involved in synchronization, there is consider-
able risk of the organization's data being stored in an unsecured location, plus the
risk of the introduction of malware.

USE OF UNTRUSTED CONTENT Mobile devices may access and use content that other
computing devices do not encounter. An example is the Quick Response (QR)
code, which is a two-dimensional barcode. QR codes are designed to be captured
by a mobile device camera and used by the mobile device. The QR code translates
to a URL, so that a malicious QR code could direct the mobile device to malicious
Web sites.

USE OF LOCATION SERVICES The GPS capability on mobile devices can be used to
maintain a knowledge of the physical location of the device. While this feature
might be useful to an organization as part of a presence service, it creates security
risks. An attacker can use the location information to determine where the device
and user are located, which may be of use to the attacker.

Mobile Device Security Strategy

With the threats listed in the preceding discussion in mind, we outline the principal
elements of a mobile device security strategy. They fall into three categories: device
security, client/server traffic security, and barrier security (Figure 18.2).

DEVICE SECURITY A number of organizations will supply mobile devices for
employee use and preconfigure those devices to conform to the enterprise secu-
rity policy. However, many organizations will find it convenient or even necessary
to adopt a bring-your-own-device (BYOD) policy that allows the personal mobile
devices of employees to have access to corporate resources. IT managers should be
able to inspect each device before allowing network access. IT will want to estab-
lish configuration guidelines for operating systems and applications. For example,
"rooted" or "jail-broken" devices are not permitted on the network, and mobile
588 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                                                                                         Mobile device is
                                                                                         configured with
                                                                                         security mechanisms and
                                                                                         parameters to conform to
                                                                                         organization security policy

Traffic is encrypted;                Mobile device
uses SSL or IPsec                    configuration
VPN tunnel                           server

                       Application/                Authentication/
                       database                    access control
                       server                      server

                                                     Firewall               Authentication
                                                                            and access control
                                                           Firewall limits  protocols used to
                                                           scope of data    verify device and user
                                                           and application  and establish limits
                                                           access           on access

Figure 18.2 Mobile Device Security Elements

devices cannot store corporate contacts on local storage. Whether a device is owned
by the organization or BYOD, the organization should configure the device with
security controls, including the following:

    Enable auto-lock, which causes the device to lock if it has not been used for a
       given amount of time, requiring the user to re-enter a four-digit PIN or a pass-
       word to re-activate the device.

    Enable password or PIN protection. The PIN or password is needed to unlock
       the device. In addition, it can be configured so that email and other data on the
       device are encrypted using the PIN or password and can only be retrieved with
       the PIN or password.

    Avoid using auto-complete features that remember user names or passwords.

    Enable remote wipe.

    Ensure that SSL protection is enabled, if available.

    Make sure that software, including operating systems and applications, is up
       to date.

    Install antivirus software as it becomes available.
                                        18.3 / IEEE 802.11 WIRELESS LAN OVERVIEW 589

            Either sensitive data should be prohibited from storage on the mobile device
               or it should be encrypted.

            IT staff should also have the ability to remotely access devices, wipe the device
               of all data, and then disable the device in the event of loss or theft.

            The organization may prohibit all installation of third-party applications,
               implement whitelisting to prohibit installation of all unapproved applications,
               or implement a secure sandbox that isolates the organization's data and appli-
               cations from all other data and applications on the mobile device. Any applica-
               tion that is on an approved list should be accompanied by a digital signature
               and a public-key certificate from an approved authority.

            The organization can implement and enforce restrictions on what devices can
               synchronize and on the use of cloud-based storage.

            To deal with the threat of untrusted content, security responses can include
               training of personnel on the risks inherent in untrusted content and disabling
               camera use on corporate mobile devices.

            To counter the threat of malicious use of location services, the security policy
               can dictate that such service is disabled on all mobile devices.

        TRAFFIC SECURITY Traffic security is based on the usual mechanisms for encryption
        and authentication. All traffic should be encrypted and travel by secure means, such
        as SSL or IPv6. Virtual private networks (VPNs) can be configured so that all traffic
        between the mobile device and the organization's network is via a VPN.

               A strong authentication protocol should be used to limit the access from the
        device to the resources of the organization. Often, a mobile device has a single
        device-specific authenticator, because it is assumed that the device has only one
        user. A preferable strategy is to have a two-layer authentication mechanism, which
        involves authenticating the device and then authenticating the user of the device.

        BARRIER SECURITY The organization should have security mechanisms to protect
        the network from unauthorized access. The security strategy can also include fire-
        wall policies specific to mobile device traffic. Firewall policies can limit the scope
        of data and application access for all mobile devices. Similarly, intrusion detection
        and intrusion prevention systems can be configured to have tighter rules for mobile
        device traffic.

18.3 IEEE 802.11 WIRELESS LAN OVERVIEW

        IEEE 802 is a committee that has developed standards for a wide range of local area
        networks (LANs). In 1990, the IEEE 802 Committee formed a new working group,
        IEEE 802.11, with a charter to develop a protocol and transmission specifications
        for wireless LANs (WLANs). Since that time, the demand for WLANs at different
        frequencies and data rates has exploded. Keeping pace with this demand, the IEEE
        802.11 working group has issued an ever-expanding list of standards. Table 18.1
        briefly defines key terms used in the IEEE 802.11 standard.
590 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

Table 18.1 IEEE 802.11 Terminology

Access point (AP)           Any entity that has station functionality and provides access to the
                            distribution system via the wireless medium for associated stations.
Basic service set (BSS)
Coordination function       A set of stations controlled by a single coordination function.

Distribution system (DS)    The logical function that determines when a station operating within a BSS
                            is permitted to transmit and may be able to receive PDUs.
Extended service set (ESS)
                            A system used to interconnect a set of BSSs and integrated LANs to create
MAC protocol data unit      an ESS.
(MPDU)
MAC service data unit       A set of one or more interconnected BSSs and integrated LANs that
(MSDU)                      appear as a single BSS to the LLC layer at any station associated with one
Station                     of these BSSs.

                            The unit of data exchanged between two peer MAC entities using the
                            services of the physical layer.

                            Information that is delivered as a unit between MAC users.

                            Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant MAC and physical
                            layer.

The Wi-Fi Alliance

The first 802.11 standard to gain broad industry acceptance was 802.11b. Although
802.11b products are all based on the same standard, there is always a concern
whether products from different vendors will successfully interoperate. To meet
this concern, the Wireless Ethernet Compatibility Alliance (WECA), an indus-
try consortium, was formed in 1999. This organization, subsequently renamed the
Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) Alliance, created a test suite to certify interoperability for
802.11b products. The term used for certified 802.11b products is Wi-Fi. Wi-Fi certi-
fication has been extended to 802.11g products. The Wi-Fi Alliance has also devel-
oped a certification process for 802.11a products, called Wi-Fi5. The Wi-Fi Alliance
is concerned with a range of market areas for WLANs, including enterprise, home,
and hot spots.

       More recently, the Wi-Fi Alliance has developed certification procedures for
IEEE 802.11 security standards, referred to as Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA). The
most recent version of WPA, known as WPA2, incorporates all of the features of
the IEEE 802.11i WLAN security specification.

IEEE 802 Protocol Architecture

Before proceeding, we need to briefly preview the IEEE 802 protocol architecture.
IEEE 802.11 standards are defined within the structure of a layered set of protocols.
This structure, used for all IEEE 802 standards, is illustrated in Figure 18.3.

PHYSICAL LAYER The lowest layer of the IEEE 802 reference model is the physical
layer, which includes such functions as encoding/decoding of signals and bit trans-
mission/reception. In addition, the physical layer includes a specification of the
transmission medium. In the case of IEEE 802.11, the physical layer also defines
frequency bands and antenna characteristics.
               18.3 / IEEE 802.11 WIRELESS LAN OVERVIEW 591

               General IEEE 802              Specific IEEE 802.11
                    functions                       functions

Logical Link   Flow control
   Control     Error control

Medium Access  Assemble data into frame      Reliable data delivery
     Control   Addressing                    Wireless access control protocols
               Error detection
               Medium access

Physical       Encoding/decoding of signals  Frequency band definition
               Bit transmission/reception    Wireless signal encoding
               Transmission medium

Figure 18.3 IEEE 802.11 Protocol Stack

MEDIA ACCESS CONTROL All LANs consist of collections of devices that share the
network's transmission capacity. Some means of controlling access to the transmis-
sion medium is needed to provide an orderly and efficient use of that capacity. This
is the function of a media access control (MAC) layer. The MAC layer receives data
from a higher-layer protocol, typically the Logical Link Control (LLC) layer, in the
form of a block of data known as the MAC service data unit (MSDU). In general,
the MAC layer performs the following functions:

    On transmission, assemble data into a frame, known as a MAC protocol data
       unit (MPDU) with address and error-detection fields.

    On reception, disassemble frame, and perform address recognition and error
       detection.

    Govern access to the LAN transmission medium.

       The exact format of the MPDU differs somewhat for the various MAC proto-
cols in use. In general, all of the MPDUs have a format similar to that of Figure 18.4.
The fields of this frame are as follows.

    MAC Control: This field contains any protocol control information needed for
       the functioning of the MAC protocol. For example, a priority level could be
       indicated here.

    Destination MAC Address: The destination physical address on the LAN for
       this MPDU.

    Source MAC Address: The source physical address on the LAN for this MPDU.
592 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

 MAC      Destination      Source   MAC Service Data Unit (MSDU)  CRC
Control  MAC Address   MAC Address

                        MAC header                                MAC trailer
Figure 18.4 General IEEE 802 MPDU Format

    MAC Service Data Unit: The data from the next higher layer.

    CRC: The cyclic redundancy check field; also known as the Frame Check
       Sequence (FCS) field. This is an error-detecting code, such as that which is
       used in other data-link control protocols. The CRC is calculated based on the
       bits in the entire MPDU. The sender calculates the CRC and adds it to the
       frame. The receiver performs the same calculation on the incoming MPDU
       and compares that calculation to the CRC field in that incoming MPDU. If
       the two values don't match, then one or more bits have been altered in transit.

       The fields preceding the MSDU field are referred to as the MAC header, and
the field following the MSDU field is referred to as the MAC trailer. The header
and trailer contain control information that accompany the data field and that are
used by the MAC protocol.

LOGICAL LINK CONTROL In most data-link control protocols, the data-link protocol
entity is responsible not only for detecting errors using the CRC, but for recovering
from those errors by retransmitting damaged frames. In the LAN protocol archi-
tecture, these two functions are split between the MAC and LLC layers. The MAC
layer is responsible for detecting errors and discarding any frames that contain er-
rors. The LLC layer optionally keeps track of which frames have been successfully
received and retransmits unsuccessful frames.

IEEE 802.11 Network Components and Architectural Model

Figure 18.5 illustrates the model developed by the 802.11 working group. The small-
est building block of a wireless LAN is a basic service set (BSS), which consists of
wireless stations executing the same MAC protocol and competing for access to the
same shared wireless medium. A BSS may be isolated, or it may connect to a back-
bone distribution system (DS) through an access point (AP). The AP functions as a
bridge and a relay point. In a BSS, client stations do not communicate directly with
one another. Rather, if one station in the BSS wants to communicate with another
station in the same BSS, the MAC frame is first sent from the originating station to
the AP and then from the AP to the destination station. Similarly, a MAC frame
from a station in the BSS to a remote station is sent from the local station to the AP
and then relayed by the AP over the DS on its way to the destination station. The
BSS generally corresponds to what is referred to as a cell in the literature. The DS
can be a switch, a wired network, or a wireless network.

       When all the stations in the BSS are mobile stations that communicate directly
with one another (not using an AP), the BSS is called an independent BSS (IBSS).
An IBSS is typically an ad hoc network. In an IBSS, the stations all communicate
directly, and no AP is involved.
                            18.3 / IEEE 802.11 WIRELESS LAN OVERVIEW 593

                            Distribution System

                                                        AP 2

AP 1

                                                 Basic Service
                                                   Set (BSS)

             Basic Service        STA 1
               Set (BSS)
                                                                     STA 8
STA 2
                            STA4                 STA 6        STA 7
                  STA 3

Figure 18.5 IEEE 802.11 Extended Service Set

       A simple configuration is shown in Figure 18.5, in which each station belongs
to a single BSS; that is, each station is within wireless range only of other stations
within the same BSS. It is also possible for two BSSs to overlap geographically, so
that a single station could participate in more than one BSS. Furthermore, the asso-
ciation between a station and a BSS is dynamic. Stations may turn off, come within
range, and go out of range.

       An extended service set (ESS) consists of two or more basic service sets
interconnected by a distribution system. The extended service set appears as a sin-
gle logical LAN to the logical link control (LLC) level.

IEEE 802.11 Services

IEEE 802.11 defines nine services that need to be provided by the wireless LAN to
achieve functionality equivalent to that which is inherent to wired LANs. Table 18.2
lists the services and indicates two ways of categorizing them.

   1. The service provider can be either the station or the DS. Station services are
       implemented in every 802.11 station, including AP stations. Distribution ser-
       vices are provided between BSSs; these services may be implemented in an AP
       or in another special-purpose device attached to the distribution system.

   2. Three of the services are used to control IEEE 802.11 LAN access and confi-
       dentiality. Six of the services are used to support delivery of MSDUs between
       stations. If the MSDU is too large to be transmitted in a single MPDU, it may
       be fragmented and transmitted in a series of MPDUs.
594 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

Table 18.2 IEEE 802.11 Services

           Service             Provider              Used to support
Association         Distribution system     MSDU delivery
Authentication      Station                 LAN access and security
Deauthentication    Station                 LAN access and security
Disassociation      Distribution system     MSDU delivery
Distribution        Distribution system     MSDU delivery
Integration         Distribution system     MSDU delivery
MSDU delivery       Station                 MSDU delivery
Privacy             Station                 LAN access and security
Reassociation       Distribution system     MSDU delivery

       Following the IEEE 802.11 document, we next discuss the services in an order
designed to clarify the operation of an IEEE 802.11 ESS network. MSDU delivery,
which is the basic service, already has been mentioned. Services related to security
are introduced in Section 18.4.

DISTRIBUTION OF MESSAGES WITHIN A DS The two services involved with the dis-
tribution of messages within a DS are distribution and integration. Distribution is
the primary service used by stations to exchange MPDUs when the MPDUs must
traverse the DS to get from a station in one BSS to a station in another BSS. For
example, suppose a frame is to be sent from station 2 (STA 2) to station 7 (STA 7)
in Figure 18.5. The frame is sent from STA 2 to AP 1, which is the AP for this BSS.
The AP gives the frame to the DS, which has the job of directing the frame to the
AP associated with STA 7 in the target BSS. AP 2 receives the frame and forwards
it to STA 7. How the message is transported through the DS is beyond the scope of
the IEEE 802.11 standard.

       If the two stations that are communicating are within the same BSS, then the
distribution service logically goes through the single AP of that BSS.

       The integration service enables transfer of data between a station on an IEEE
802.11 LAN and a station on an integrated IEEE 802.x LAN. The term integrated
refers to a wired LAN that is physically connected to the DS and whose stations
may be logically connected to an IEEE 802.11 LAN via the integration service. The
integration service takes care of any address translation and media conversion logic
required for the exchange of data.

ASSOCIATION-RELATED SERVICES The primary purpose of the MAC layer is to
transfer MSDUs between MAC entities; this purpose is fulfilled by the distribu-
tion service. For that service to function, it requires information about stations
within the ESS that is provided by the association-related services. Before the
distribution service can deliver data to or accept data from a station, that sta-
tion must be associated. Before looking at the concept of association, we need
                                                       18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 595

                         to describe the concept of mobility. The standard defines three transition types,
                         based on mobility:

                             No transition: A station of this type is either stationary or moves only within
                                the direct communication range of the communicating stations of a single BSS.

                             BSS transition: This is defined as a station movement from one BSS to another
                                BSS within the same ESS. In this case, delivery of data to the station requires that
                                the addressing capability be able to recognize the new location of the station.

                             ESS transition: This is defined as a station movement from a BSS in one ESS
                                to a BSS within another ESS. This case is supported only in the sense that
                                the station can move. Maintenance of upper-layer connections supported by
                                802.11 cannot be guaranteed. In fact, disruption of service is likely to occur.

                                To deliver a message within a DS, the distribution service needs to know where
                         the destination station is located. Specifically, the DS needs to know the identity of
                         the AP to which the message should be delivered in order for that message to reach
                         the destination station. To meet this requirement, a station must maintain an asso-
                         ciation with the AP within its current BSS. Three services relate to this requirement:

                             Association: Establishes an initial association between a station and an AP.
                                Before a station can transmit or receive frames on a wireless LAN, its iden-
                                tity and address must be known. For this purpose, a station must establish an
                                association with an AP within a particular BSS. The AP can then communicate
                                this information to other APs within the ESS to facilitate routing and delivery
                                of addressed frames.

                             Reassociation: Enables an established association to be transferred from one
                                AP to another, allowing a mobile station to move from one BSS to another.

                             Disassociation: A notification from either a station or an AP that an existing
                                association is terminated. A station should give this notification before leaving
                                an ESS or shutting down. However, the MAC management facility protects
                                itself against stations that disappear without notification.

             18.4 IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY

                         There are two characteristics of a wired LAN that are not inherent in a wireless LAN.

                            1. In order to transmit over a wired LAN, a station must be physically connected
                                to the LAN. On the other hand, with a wireless LAN, any station within radio
                                range of the other devices on the LAN can transmit. In a sense, there is a form
                                of authentication with a wired LAN in that it requires some positive and pre-
                                sumably observable action to connect a station to a wired LAN.

                            2. Similarly, in order to receive a transmission from a station that is part of a
                                wired LAN, the receiving station also must be attached to the wired LAN.
                                On the other hand, with a wireless LAN, any station within radio range can
                                receive. Thus, a wired LAN provides a degree of privacy, limiting reception of
                                data to stations connected to the LAN.

Hiva-Network.Com
596 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                  These differences between wired and wireless LANs suggest the increased
          need for robust security services and mechanisms for wireless LANs. The original
          802.11 specification included a set of security features for privacy and authenti-
          cation that were quite weak. For privacy, 802.11 defined the Wired Equivalent
          Privacy (WEP) algorithm. The privacy portion of the 802.11 standard contained
          major weaknesses. Subsequent to the development of WEP, the 802.11i task
          group has developed a set of capabilities to address the WLAN security issues.
          In order to accelerate the introduction of strong security into WLANs, the Wi-Fi
          Alliance promulgated Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) as a Wi-Fi standard. WPA
          is a set of security mechanisms that eliminates most 802.11 security issues and
          was based on the current state of the 802.11i standard. The final form of the
          802.11i standard is referred to as Robust Security Network (RSN). The Wi-Fi
          Alliance certifies vendors in compliance with the full 802.11i specification under
          the WPA2 program.

                  The RSN specification is quite complex, and occupies 145 pages of the 2012
          IEEE 802.11 standard. In this section, we provide an overview.

         IEEE 802.11i Services

          The 802.11i RSN security specification defines the following services.

              Authentication: A protocol is used to define an exchange between a user and
                  an AS that provides mutual authentication and generates temporary keys to
                  be used between the client and the AP over the wireless link.

              Access control:1 This function enforces the use of the authentication function,
                  routes the messages properly, and facilitates key exchange. It can work with a
                  variety of authentication protocols.

              Privacy with message integrity: MAC-level data (e.g., an LLC PDU) are
                  encrypted along with a message integrity code that ensures that the data have
                  not been altered.

                  Figure 18.6a indicates the security protocols used to support these services,
          while Figure 18.6b lists the cryptographic algorithms used for these services.

         IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation

          The operation of an IEEE 802.11i RSN can be broken down into five distinct phases
          of operation. The exact nature of the phases will depend on the configuration and
          the end points of the communication. Possibilities include (see Figure 18.5):

              1. Two wireless stations in the same BSS communicating via the access point
                  (AP) for that BSS.

              2. Two wireless stations (STAs) in the same ad hoc IBSS communicating directly
                  with each other.

             1In this context, we are discussing access control as a security function. This is a different function than
             media access control (MAC) as described in Section 18.3. Unfortunately, the literature and the standards
             use the term access control in both contexts.
                                          18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 597

                                         Robust Security Network (RSN)

Protocols Services   Access Control      Authentication                   Confidentiality, Data
                                             and Key                      Origin Authentication
                       IEEE 802.1
                       Port-based          Generation                       and Integrity and
                     Access Control                                         Replay Protection
                                            Extensible
                                         Authentication                     TKIP CCMP
                                         Protocol (EAP)

                                         (a) Services and protocols

                                         Robust Security Network (RSN)

Algorithms Services  Confidentiality      Integrity and                                  Key
                                          Data Origin                                Generation
                                         Authentication
                                                                                  HMAC- RFC
                     TKIP   CCM    NIST                             TKIP  CCM     SHA-1 1750
                     (RC4)  (AES-   Key  HMAC- HMAC- (Michael             (AES-
                            CTR)   Wrap  SHA-1 MD5 MIC)                   CBC-
                                                                          MAC)

                                         (b) Cryptographic algorithms

                     CBC-MAC = Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code (MAC)

                     CCM    = Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code

                     CCMP = Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining MAC Protocol

                     TKIP   = Temporal Key Integrity Protocol

Figure 18.6 Elements of IEEE 802.11i

   3. Two wireless stations in different BSSs communicating via their respective
       APs across a distribution system.

   4. A wireless station communicating with an end station on a wired network via
       its AP and the distribution system.

       IEEE 802.11i security is concerned only with secure communication between
the STA and its AP. In case 1 in the preceding list, secure communication is assured
if each STA establishes secure communications with the AP. Case 2 is similar, with
the AP functionality residing in the STA. For case 3, security is not provided across
the distribution system at the level of IEEE 802.11, but only within each BSS. End-
to-end security (if required) must be provided at a higher layer. Similarly, in case 4,
security is only provided between the STA and its AP.
598 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                  With these considerations in mind, Figure 18.7 depicts the five phases of op-
          eration for an RSN and maps them to the network components involved. One new
          component is the authentication server (AS). The rectangles indicate the exchange
          of sequences of MPDUs. The five phases are defined as follows.

              Discovery: An AP uses messages called Beacons and Probe Responses to ad-
                  vertise its IEEE 802.11i security policy. The STA uses these to identify an AP
                  for a WLAN with which it wishes to communicate. The STA associates with
                  the AP, which it uses to select the cipher suite and authentication mechanism
                  when the Beacons and Probe Responses present a choice.

              Authentication: During this phase, the STA and AS prove their identities to
                  each other. The AP blocks non-authentication traffic between the STA and AS
                  until the authentication transaction is successful. The AP does not participate
                  in the authentication transaction other than forwarding traffic between the
                  STA and AS.

              Key generation and distribution: The AP and the STA perform several opera-
                  tions that cause cryptographic keys to be generated and placed on the AP and
                  the STA. Frames are exchanged between the AP and STA only.

              Protected data transfer: Frames are exchanged between the STA and the end
                  station through the AP. As denoted by the shading and the encryption module
                  icon, secure data transfer occurs between the STA and the AP only; security is
                  not provided end-to-end.

STA  AP  AS                                                                  End Station

               Phase 1 - Discovery
                             Phase 2 - Authentication

                           Phase 3 - Key Management
                                          Phase 4 - Protected Data Transfer

      Phase 5 - Connection Termination
Figure 18.7 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation
                                  18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 599

    Connection termination: The AP and STA exchange frames. During this phase,
       the secure connection is torn down and the connection is restored to the origi-
       nal state.

Discovery Phase

We now look in more detail at the RSN phases of operation, beginning with the
discovery phase, which is illustrated in the upper portion of Figure 18.8. The pur-
pose of this phase is for an STA and an AP to recognize each other, agree on a set
of security capabilities, and establish an association for future communication using
those security capabilities.

STA                                                 AP                              AS

Station sends a request     Probe request
         to join network
                                                        AP sends possible

                            Probe response              security parameter
                                                        (security capabilities set

    Station sends a              Open system            per the security policy)
request to perform          authentication request

null authentication                Open system
                            authentication response AP performs

                                                              null authentication

Station sends a request to  Association request
   associate with AP with

security parameters         Association response        AP sends the associated
Station sets selected                                   security parameters

security parameters

802.1X-controlled port blocked

                            802.1X EAP request

                            802.1X EAP response

                                                        Access request
                                                        (EAP request)

                              Extensible Authentication Protocol Exchange

                                                                Accept/EAP-success
                                                                     key material

                            802.1X EAP success

                               802.1X-controlled port blocked

Figure 18.8 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation: Capability Discovery,
                 Authentication, and Association
600 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

          SECURITY CAPABILITIES During this phase, the STA and AP decide on specific tech-
          niques in the following areas:

              Confidentiality and MPDU integrity protocols for protecting unicast traffic
                  (traffic only between this STA and AP)

              Authentication method
              Cryptography key management approach

                  Confidentiality and integrity protocols for protecting multicast/broadcast traf-
          fic are dictated by the AP, since all STAs in a multicast group must use the same
          protocols and ciphers. The specification of a protocol, along with the chosen key
          length (if variable) is known as a cipher suite. The options for the confidentiality and
          integrity cipher suite are

              WEP, with either a 40-bit or 104-bit key, which allows backward compatibility
                  with older IEEE 802.11 implementations

              TKIP
              CCMP
              Vendor-specific methods

                  The other negotiable suite is the authentication and key management (AKM)
          suite, which defines (1) the means by which the AP and STA perform mutual au-
          thentication and (2) the means for deriving a root key from which other keys may
          be generated. The possible AKM suites are

              IEEE 802.1X
              Pre-shared key (no explicit authentication takes place and mutual authentica-

                  tion is implied if the STA and AP share a unique secret key)
              Vendor-specific methods

          MPDU EXCHANGE The discovery phase consists of three exchanges.

              Network and security capability discovery: During this exchange, STAs dis-
                  cover the existence of a network with which to communicate. The AP either
                  periodically broadcasts its security capabilities (not shown in figure), indicated
                  by RSN IE (Robust Security Network Information Element), in a specific
                  channel through the Beacon frame; or responds to a station's Probe Request
                  through a Probe Response frame. A wireless station may discover available
                  access points and corresponding security capabilities by either passively moni-
                  toring the Beacon frames or actively probing every channel.

              Open system authentication: The purpose of this frame sequence, which pro-
                  vides no security, is simply to maintain backward compatibility with the IEEE
                  802.11 state machine, as implemented in existing IEEE 802.11 hardware. In
                  essence, the two devices (STA and AP) simply exchange identifiers.

              Association: The purpose of this stage is to agree on a set of security capa-
                  bilities to be used. The STA then sends an Association Request frame to
                  the AP. In this frame, the STA specifies one set of matching capabilities
                                  18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 601

       (one authentication and key management suite, one pairwise cipher suite,
       and one group-key cipher suite) from among those advertised by the AP.
       If there is no match in capabilities between the AP and the STA, the AP
       refuses the Association Request. The STA blocks it too, in case it has associ-
       ated with a rogue AP or someone is inserting frames illicitly on its channel.
       As shown in Figure 18.8, the IEEE 802.1X controlled ports are blocked, and
       no user traffic goes beyond the AP. The concept of blocked ports is explained
       subsequently.

Authentication Phase

As was mentioned, the authentication phase enables mutual authentication between
an STA and an authentication server (AS) located in the DS. Authentication is
designed to allow only authorized stations to use the network and to provide the
STA with assurance that it is communicating with a legitimate network.

IEEE 802.1X ACCESS CONTROL APPROACH IEEE 802.11i makes use of another stan-
dard that was designed to provide access control functions for LANs. The standard
is IEEE 802.1X, Port-Based Network Access Control. The authentication proto-
col that is used, the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), is defined in the
IEEE 802.1X standard. IEEE 802.1X uses the terms supplicant, authenticator, and
authentication server (AS). In the context of an 802.11 WLAN, the first two terms
correspond to the wireless station and the AP. The AS is typically a separate device
on the wired side of the network (i.e., accessible over the DS) but could also reside
directly on the authenticator.

       Before a supplicant is authenticated by the AS using an authentication proto-
col, the authenticator only passes control or authentication messages between the
supplicant and the AS; the 802.1X control channel is unblocked, but the 802.11 data
channel is blocked. Once a supplicant is authenticated and keys are provided, the
authenticator can forward data from the supplicant, subject to predefined access
control limitations for the supplicant to the network. Under these circumstances,
the data channel is unblocked.

       As indicated in Figure 16.5, 802.1X uses the concepts of controlled and uncon-
trolled ports. Ports are logical entities defined within the authenticator and refer to
physical network connections. For a WLAN, the authenticator (the AP) may have
only two physical ports: one connecting to the DS and one for wireless communica-
tion within its BSS. Each logical port is mapped to one of these two physical ports.
An uncontrolled port allows the exchange of PDUs between the supplicant and the
other AS, regardless of the authentication state of the supplicant. A controlled port
allows the exchange of PDUs between a supplicant and other systems on the LAN
only if the current state of the supplicant authorizes such an exchange. IEEE 802.1X
is covered in more detail in Chapter 16.

       The 802.1X framework, with an upper-layer authentication protocol, fits
nicely with a BSS architecture that includes a number of wireless stations and an
AP. However, for an IBSS, there is no AP. For an IBSS, 802.11i provides a more
complex solution that, in essence, involves pairwise authentication between stations
on the IBSS.
602 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

          MPDU EXCHANGE The lower part of Figure 18.8 shows the MPDU exchange dic-
          tated by IEEE 802.11 for the authentication phase. We can think of authentication
          phase as consisting of the following three phases.

              Connect to AS: The STA sends a request to its AP (the one with which it has
                  an association) for connection to the AS. The AP acknowledges this request
                  and sends an access request to the AS.

              EAP exchange: This exchange authenticates the STA and AS to each other.
                  A number of alternative exchanges are possible, as explained subsequently.

              Secure key delivery: Once authentication is established, the AS generates a
                  master session key (MSK), also known as the Authentication, Authorization,
                  and Accounting (AAA) key and sends it to the STA. As explained subse-
                  quently, all the cryptographic keys needed by the STA for secure communi-
                  cation with its AP are generated from this MSK. IEEE 802.11i does not pre-
                  scribe a method for secure delivery of the MSK but relies on EAP for this.
                  Whatever method is used, it involves the transmission of an MPDU containing
                  an encrypted MSK from the AS, via the AP, to the AS.

          EAP EXCHANGE As mentioned, there are a number of possible EAP exchanges that
          can be used during the authentication phase. Typically, the message flow between
          STA and AP employs the EAP over LAN (EAPOL) protocol, and the message
          flow between the AP and AS uses the Remote Authentication Dial In User Service
          (RADIUS) protocol, although other options are available for both STA-to-AP and
          AP-to-AS exchanges. [FRAN07] provides the following summary of the authenti-
          cation exchange using EAPOL and RADIUS.

              1. The EAP exchange begins with the AP issuing an EAP-Request/Identity
                  frame to the STA.

              2. The STA replies with an EAP-Response/Identity frame, which the AP receives
                  over the uncontrolled port. The packet is then encapsulated in RADIUS over
                  EAP and passed on to the RADIUS server as a RADIUS-Access-Request packet.

              3. The AAA server replies with a RADIUS-Access-Challenge packet, which is
                  passed on to the STA as an EAP-Request. This request is of the appropriate
                  authentication type and contains relevant challenge information.

              4. The STA formulates an EAP-Response message and sends it to the AS. The
                  response is translated by the AP into a Radius-Access-Request with the re-
                  sponse to the challenge as a data field. Steps 3 and 4 may be repeated multiple
                  times, depending on the EAP method in use. For TLS tunneling methods, it is
                  common for authentication to require 10 to 20 round trips.

              5. The AAA server grants access with a Radius-Access-Accept packet. The AP
                  issues an EAP-Success frame. (Some protocols require confirmation of the
                  EAP success inside the TLS tunnel for authenticity validation.) The controlled
                  port is authorized, and the user may begin to access the network.

                  Note from Figure 18.8 that the AP controlled port is still blocked to general
          user traffic. Although the authentication is successful, the ports remain blocked
                                  18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 603

until the temporal keys are installed in the STA and AP, which occurs during the
4-Way Handshake.

Key Management Phase

During the key management phase, a variety of cryptographic keys are generated
and distributed to STAs. There are two types of keys: pairwise keys used for com-
munication between an STA and an AP and group keys used for multicast com-
munication. Figure 18.9, based on [FRAN07], shows the two key hierarchies, and
Table 18.3 defines the individual keys.

                                Out-of-band path                        EAP method path

                             PSK                                AAAK or MSK

                                  Pre-shared key                               AAA key

                             256 bits         User-defined       256 bits                        EAP
                                                cryptoid                                   authentication

Legend                                        PMK

        No modification                          Pairwise master key

        Possible truncation                   256 bits          Following EAP authentication
        PRF (pseudo random                                                    or PSK
        function) using
        HMAC-SHA-1                     PTK
                                                 Pairwise transient key

                             384 bits (CCMP)                             During 4-way handshake
                             512 bits (TKIP)

                 KCK                             KEK                                       TK

        EAPOL key confirmation key            EAPOL key encryption key                            Temporal key

        128 bits                              128 bits                                     128 bits (CCMP)
                                                                                           256 bits (TKIP)

                                                        These keys are
                                                  components of the PTK

                                              (a) Pairwise key hierarchy

                                              GMK (generated by AS)

                                              Group master key

                                              256 bits               Changes periodically
                                                                      or if compromised

                                              GTK

                                              Group temporal key

                                       40 bits, 104 bits (WEP)   Changes based on
                                          128 bits (CCMP)       policy (dissociation,
                                           256 bits (TKIP)       deauthentication)

                                                                  (b) Group key hierarchy
Figure 18.9 IEEE 802.11i Key Hierarchies
604 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

Table 18.3 IEEE 802.11i Keys for Data Confidentiality and Integrity Protocols

Abbreviation               Name        Description / Purpose       Size (bits)           Type
AAA Key           Authentication,                                      Ú 256    Key generation key,
                  Accounting, and      Used to derive the PMK.                  root key
PSK               Authorization Key    Used with the IEEE                256
PMK                                    802.1X authentication            256     Key generation key,
GMK               Pre-shared Key       and key management               128     root key
PTK                                    approach. Same as           512 (TKIP)   Key generation key
                  Pairwise Master Key  MMSK.                      384 (CCMP)    Key generation key
TK                Group Master Key                                              Composite key
                  Pair-wise Transient  Becomes the PMK             256 (TKIP)
GTK               Key                  in pre-shared key          128 (CCMP)    Traffic key
                                       environments.
MIC Key           Temporal Key                                     256 (TKIP)   Traffic key
EAPOL-KCK                              Used with other inputs to  128 (CCMP)
                  Group Temporal Key   derive the PTK.            40,104 (WEP)  Message integrity key
EAPOL-KEK                                                                       Message integrity key
                  Message Integrity    Used with other inputs to         64
WEP Key           Code Key             derive the GTK.                  128     Traffic key / key
                  EAPOL-Key                                                     encryption key
                  Confirmation Key     Derived from the PMK.            128
                                       Comprises the EAPOL-                     Traffic key
                  EAPOL-Key            KCK, EAPOL-KEK, and             40,104
                  Encryption Key       TK and (for TKIP) the
                                       MIC key.
                  Wired Equivalent
                  Privacy Key          Used with TKIP or
                                       CCMP to provide
                                       confidentiality and
                                       integrity protection for
                                       unicast user traffic.

                                       Derived from the
                                       GMK. Used to provide
                                       confidentiality and
                                       integrity protection for
                                       multicast/broadcast user
                                       traffic.

                                       Used by TKIP's Michael
                                       MIC to provide integrity
                                       protection of messages.

                                       Used to provide integrity
                                       protection for key
                                       material distributed
                                       during the 4-Way
                                       Handshake.

                                       Used to ensure the
                                       confidentiality of the
                                       GTK and other key
                                       material in the 4-Way
                                       Handshake.

                                       Used with WEP.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                  18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 605

PAIRWISE KEYS Pairwise keys are used for communication between a pair of de-
vices, typically between an STA and an AP. These keys form a hierarchy beginning
with a master key from which other keys are derived dynamically and used for a
limited period of time.

       At the top level of the hierarchy are two possibilities. A pre-shared key (PSK)
is a secret key shared by the AP and a STA and installed in some fashion outside
the scope of IEEE 802.11i. The other alternative is the master session key (MSK),
also known as the AAAK, which is generated using the IEEE 802.1X protocol dur-
ing the authentication phase, as described previously. The actual method of key
generation depends on the details of the authentication protocol used. In either case
(PSK or MSK), there is a unique key shared by the AP with each STA with which
it communicates. All the other keys derived from this master key are also unique
between an AP and an STA. Thus, each STA, at any time, has one set of keys, as
depicted in the hierarchy of Figure 18.9a, while the AP has one set of such keys for
each of its STAs.

       The pairwise master key (PMK) is derived from the master key. If a PSK is
used, then the PSK is used as the PMK; if a MSK is used, then the PMK is derived
from the MSK by truncation (if necessary). By the end of the authentication phase,
marked by the 802.1X EAP Success message (Figure 18.8), both the AP and the
STA have a copy of their shared PMK.

       The PMK is used to generate the pairwise transient key (PTK), which in fact
consists of three keys to be used for communication between an STA and AP after
they have been mutually authenticated. To derive the PTK, the HMAC-SHA-1
function is applied to the PMK, the MAC addresses of the STA and AP, and nonces
generated when needed. Using the STA and AP addresses in the generation of the
PTK provides protection against session hijacking and impersonation; using nonces
provides additional random keying material.

       The three parts of the PTK are as follows.

    EAP Over LAN (EAPOL) Key Confirmation Key (EAPOL-KCK): Supports
       the integrity and data origin authenticity of STA-to-AP control frames during
       operational setup of an RSN. It also performs an access control function:
       proof-of-possession of the PMK. An entity that possesses the PMK is autho-
       rized to use the link.

    EAPOL Key Encryption Key (EAPOL-KEK): Protects the confidentiality of
       keys and other data during some RSN association procedures.

    Temporal Key (TK): Provides the actual protection for user traffic.

GROUP KEYS Group keys are used for multicast communication in which one STA
sends MPDU's to multiple STAs. At the top level of the group key hierarchy is the
group master key (GMK). The GMK is a key-generating key used with other inputs
to derive the group temporal key (GTK). Unlike the PTK, which is generated using
material from both AP and STA, the GTK is generated by the AP and transmitted
606 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

          to its associated STAs. Exactly how this GTK is generated is undefined. IEEE
          802.11i, however, requires that its value is computationally indistinguishable from
          random. The GTK is distributed securely using the pairwise keys that are already
          established. The GTK is changed every time a device leaves the network.

          PAIRWISE KEY DISTRIBUTION The upper part of Figure 18.10 shows the MPDU
          exchange for distributing pairwise keys. This exchange is known as the 4-way
          handshake. The STA and AP use this handshake to confirm the existence of the

                                            STA                                 AP

                                            AP's 802.1X-controlled port blocked

Message 2 delivers another nonce to the                  Message 1               Message 1 delivers a nonce to
AP so that it can also generate the         EAPOL-key (Anonce, Unicast)          the STA so that it can generate
PTK. It demonstrates to the AP that                                              the PTK.
the STA is alive, ensures that the                      Message 2
PTK is fresh (new) and that there is no          EAPOL-key (Snonce,
man-in-the-middle.
                                                     Unicast, MIC)
Message 4 serves as an acknowledgment to
Message 3. It serves no cryptographic                   Message 3                Message 3 demonstrates to
function. This message also ensures the       EAPOL-key (Install PTK,            the STA that the authenticator
reliable start of the group key handshake.                                       is alive, ensures that the PTK is
                                                     Unicast, MIC)               fresh (new) and that there is no
                                                                                 man-in-the-middle.
                                                       Message 4
                                            EAPOL-key (Unicast, MIC)

                                                 AP's 802.1X-controlled port
                                                 unblocked for unicast traffic

The STA decrypts the GTK                                   Message 1             Message 1 delivers a new GTK to
and installs it for use.                         EAPOL-key (GTK, MIC)            the STA. The GTK is encrypted
                                                                                 before it is sent and the entire
Message 2 is delivered to the                             Message 2              message is integrity protected.
AP. This frame serves only as                       EAPOL-key (MIC)
an acknowledgment to the AP.                                                     The AP installs the GTK.

Figure 18.10 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation: Four-Way Handshake and Group Key Handshake
                                  18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 607

PMK, verify the selection of the cipher suite, and derive a fresh PTK for the follow-
ing data session. The four parts of the exchange are as follows.

    AP S STA: Message includes the MAC address of the AP and a nonce
       (Anonce)

    STA S AP: The STA generates its own nonce (Snonce) and uses both nonces
       and both MAC addresses, plus the PMK, to generate a PTK. The STA then
       sends a message containing its MAC address and Snonce, enabling the AP to
       generate the same PTK. This message includes a message integrity code
       (MIC)2 using HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA-1-128. The key used with the MIC
       is KCK.

    AP S STA: The AP is now able to generate the PTK. The AP then sends a
       message to the STA, containing the same information as in the first message,
       but this time including a MIC.

    STA S AP: This is merely an acknowledgment message, again protected by
       a MIC.

GROUP KEY DISTRIBUTION For group key distribution, the AP generates a GTK and
distributes it to each STA in a multicast group. The two-message exchange with
each STA consists of the following:

    AP S STA: This message includes the GTK, encrypted either with RC4 or
       with AES. The key used for encryption is KEK, using a key wrapping algo-
       rithm (as discussed in Chapter 12). A MIC value is appended.

    STA S AP: The STA acknowledges receipt of the GTK.This message includes
       a MIC value.

Protected Data Transfer Phase

IEEE 802.11i defines two schemes for protecting data transmitted in 802.11 MPDUs:
the Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP), and the Counter Mode-CBC MAC
Protocol (CCMP).

TKIP TKIP is designed to require only software changes to devices that are imple-
mented with the older wireless LAN security approach called Wired Equivalent
Privacy (WEP). TKIP provides two services:

    Message integrity: TKIP adds a message integrity code (MIC) to the 802.11
       MAC frame after the data field. The MIC is generated by an algorithm, called
       Michael, that computes a 64-bit value using as input the source and destination
       MAC address values and the Data field, plus key material.

    Data confidentiality: Data confidentiality is provided by encrypting the
       MPDU plus MIC value using RC4.

2 While MAC is commonly used in cryptography to refer to a Message Authentication Code, the term
MIC is used instead in connection with 802.11i because MAC has another standard meaning, Media
Access Control, in networking.
608 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY

                  The 256-bit TK (Figure 18.9) is employed as follows. Two 64-bit keys are used
          with the Michael message digest algorithm to produce a message integrity code.
          One key is used to protect STA-to-AP messages, and the other key is used to pro-
          tect AP-to-STA messages. The remaining 128 bits are truncated to generate the
          RC4 key used to encrypt the transmitted data.

                  For additional protection, a monotonically increasing TKIP sequence counter
          (TSC) is assigned to each frame. The TSC serves two purposes. First, the TSC is
          included with each MPDU and is protected by the MIC to protect against replay
          attacks. Second, the TSC is combined with the session TK to produce a dynamic en-
          cryption key that changes with each transmitted MPDU, thus making cryptanalysis
          more difficult.

          CCMP CCMP is intended for newer IEEE 802.11 devices that are equipped with
          the hardware to support this scheme. As with TKIP, CCMP provides two services:

              Message integrity: CCMP uses the cipher block chaining message authentica-
                  tion code (CBC-MAC), described in Chapter 12.

              Data confidentiality: CCMP uses the CTR block cipher mode of operation
                  with AES for encryption. CTR is described in Chapter 7.

                  The same 128-bit AES key is used for both integrity and confidentiality. The
          scheme uses a 48-bit packet number to construct a nonce to prevent replay attacks.

         The IEEE 802.11i Pseudorandom Function

          At a number of places in the IEEE 802.11i scheme, a pseudorandom function (PRF) is
          used. For example, it is used to generate nonces, to expand pairwise keys, and to gen-
          erate the GTK. Best security practice dictates that different pseudorandom number
          streams be used for these different purposes. However, for implementation efficiency,
          we would like to rely on a single pseudorandom number generator function.

                  The PRF is built on the use of HMAC-SHA-1 to generate a pseudorandom
          bit stream. Recall that HMAC-SHA-1 takes a message (block of data) and a key of
          length at least 160 bits and produces a 160-bit hash value. SHA-1 has the property
          that the change of a single bit of the input produces a new hash value with no appar-
          ent connection to the preceding hash value. This property is the basis for pseudo-
          random number generation.

                  The IEEE 802.11i PRF takes four parameters as input and produces the de-
          sired number of random bits. The function is of the form PRF(K, A, B, Len), where

                  K = a secret key
                  A = a text string specific to the application (e.g., nonce generation or pairwise

                         key expansion)
                  B = some data specific to each case
                  Len = desired number of pseudorandom bits

                  For example, for the pairwise transient key for CCMP:

                     PTK = PRF (PMK, "Pairwise key expansion", min (AP-
                                 Addr, STA-Addr) || max (AP-Addr, STA-Addr) || min
                                (Anonce, Snonce) || max (Anonce, Snonce), 384)
             18.4 / IEEE 802.11i WIRELESS LAN SECURITY 609

So, in this case, the parameters are

K = PMK
A = the text string "Pairwise key expansion"
B = a sequence of bytes formed by concatenating the two MAC addresses

      and the two nonces
Len = 384 bits

Similarly, a nonce is generated by

Nonce = PRF (Random Number, "InitCounter", MAC || Time, 256)

where Time is a measure of the network time known to the nonce generator.
       The group temporal key is generated by

GTK = PRF (GMK, "Group key expansion", MAC || Gnonce, 256)

       Figure 18.11 illustrates the function PRF(K, A, B, Len). The parameter K
serves as the key input to HMAC. The message input consists of four items concat-
enated together: the parameter A, a byte with value 0, the parameter B, and a coun-
ter i. The counter is initialized to 0. The HMAC algorithm is run once, producing
a 160-bit hash value. If more bits are required, HMAC is run again with the same
inputs, except that i is incremented each time until the necessary number of bits is
generated. We can express the logic as

PRF (K, A, B, Len)

R  S   null string
          S
for i        0 to ((Len + 159)/160 - 1) do
   S
R      R || HMAC-SHA-1 (K, A || 0 || B || i)

Return Truncate-to-Len (R, Len)

                                           +1
             A0 B i

                     ||

   K         HMAC-SHA-1

        R = HMAC-SHA-1(K, A || 0 || B || i)
   Figure 18.11 IEEE 802.11i Pseudorandom Function
610 CHAPTER 18 / WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY
  18.5 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS

Key Terms

4-way handshake             independent BSS (IBSS)      pseudorandom function
access point (AP)           logical link control (LLC)  Robust Security Network
basic service set (BSS)     media access control (MAC)
Counter Mode-CBC MAC        MAC protocol data unit          (RSN)
                                                        Temporal Key Integrity
    Protocol (CCMP)             (MPDU)
distribution system (DS)    MAC service data unit           Protocol (TKIP)
extended service set (ESS)                              Wi-Fi
group keys                      (MSDU)                  Wi-Fi Protected Access
IEEE 802.1X                 message integrity code
IEEE 802.11                                                 (WPA)
IEEE 802.11i                    (MIC)                   Wired Equivalent Privacy
                            Michael
                            pairwise keys                   (WEP)
                                                        Wireless LAN (WLAN)

Review Questions

 18.1 What is the basic building block of an 802.11 WLAN?
 18.2 List and briefly define threats to a wireless network.
 18.3 List and briefly define IEEE 802.11 services.
 18.4 List some security threats related to mobile devices.
 18.5 How is the concept of an association related to that of mobility?
 18.6 What security areas are addressed by IEEE 802.11i?
 18.7 Briefly describe the five IEEE 802.11i phases of operation.
 18.8 What is the difference between TKIP and CCMP?

Problems

 18.1 In IEEE 802.11, open system authentication simply consists of two communications.
          An authentication is requested by the client, which contains the station ID (typically
          the MAC address). This is followed by an authentication response from the AP/router
          containing a success or failure message. An example of when a failure may occur is if
          the client's MAC address is explicitly excluded in the AP/router configuration.
          a. What are the benefits of this authentication scheme?
          b. What are the security vulnerabilities of this authentication scheme?

 18.2 Prior to the introduction of IEEE 802.11i, the security scheme for IEEE 802.11 was
          Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP). WEP assumed all devices in the network share a
          secret key. The purpose of the authentication scenario is for the STA to prove that
          it possesses the secret key. Authentication proceeds as shown in Figure 18.12. The
          STA sends a message to the AP requesting authentication. The AP issues a chal-
          lenge, which is a sequence of 128 random bytes sent as plaintext. The STA encrypts
          the challenge with the shared key and returns it to the AP. The AP decrypts the
          incoming value and compares it to the challenge that it sent. If there is a match, the
          AP confirms that authentication has succeeded.
          a. What are the benefits of this authentication scheme?
          b. This authentication scheme is incomplete. What is missing and why is this impor-
              tant? Hint: The addition of one or two messages would fix the problem.
          c. What is a cryptographic weakness of this scheme?
18.5 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 611

STA                                  AP

Station sends a request    Request       AP sends challenge message
      for authentication  Challenge      containing 128-bit random
                          Response       number
       Station responds
with encrypted version     Success       AP decrypts challenge response.
                                         If match, send authentication
   of challenge number                   success message

Figure 18.12 WEP Authentication; refer to Problem 18.2

18.3 For WEP, data integrity and data confidentiality are achieved using the RC4 stream
        encryption algorithm. The transmitter of an MPDU performs the following steps,
        referred to as encapsulation:
       1. The transmitter selects an initial vector (IV) value.
       2. The IV value is concatenated with the WEP key shared by transmitter and receiver
            to form the seed, or key input, to RC4.
       3. A 32-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is computed over all the bits of the MAC
            data field and appended to the data field. The CRC is a common error-detection
            code used in data link control protocols. In this case, the CRC serves as a integrity
            check value (ICV).
       4. The result of step 3 is encrypted using RC4 to form the ciphertext block.
       5. The plaintext IV is prepended to the ciphertext block to form the encapsulated
            MPDU for transmission.
            a. Draw a block diagram that illustrates the encapsulation process.
           b. Describe the steps at the receiver end to recover the plaintext and perform the
                  integrity check.
            c. Draw a block diagram that illustrates part b.

18.4 A potential weakness of the CRC as an integrity check is that it is a linear function.
        This means that you can predict which bits of the CRC are changed if a single bit of
        the message is changed. Furthermore, it is possible to determine which combination
        of bits could be flipped in the message so that the net result is no change in the CRC.
        Thus, there are a number of combinations of bit flippings of the plaintext message
        that leave the CRC unchanged, so message integrity is defeated. However, in WEP,
        if an attacker does not know the encryption key, the attacker does not have access to
        the plaintext, only to the ciphertext block. Does this mean that the ICV is protected
        from the bit flipping attack? Explain.
                             CHAPTER

Electronic Mail Security

          19.1 Internet Mail Architecture
                          Email Components
                          Email Protocols

          19.2 Email Formats
                          RFC 5322
                          Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions

          19.3 Email Threats and Comprehensive Email Security
          19.4 S/MIME

                          Operational Description
                          S/MIME Message Content Types
                          Approved Cryptographic Algorithms
                          S/MIME Messages
                          S/MIME Certificate Processing
                          Enhanced Security Services
          19.5 Pretty Good Privacy
          19.6 DNSSEC
                          Domain Name System
                          DNS Security Extensions
          19.7 DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities
                          TLSA Record
                          Use of DANE for SMTP
                          Use of DNSSEC for S/MIME
          19.8 Sender Policy Framework
                          SPF on the Sender Side
                          SPF on the Receiver Side
          19.9 DomainKeys Identified Mail
                          Email Threats
                          DKIM Strategy
                          DKIM Functional Flow

612
                                                            19.1 / INTERNET MAIL ARCHITECTURE 613

                         19.10 Domain-Based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
                                        Identifier Alignment
                                        DMARC on the Sender Side
                                        DMARC on the Receiver Side
                                        DMARC Reports

                         19.11 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES

                          After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
                           Summarize the key functional components of the Internet mail architecture.
                           Explain the basic functionality of SMTP, POP3, and IMAP.
                           Explain the need for MIME as an enhancement to ordinary email.
                           Describe the key elements of MIME.
                           Understand the functionality of S/MIME and the security threats it addresses.
                           Understand the basic mechanisms of STARTTLS and its role in email

                               security.
                           Understand the basic mechanisms of DANE and its role in email security.
                           Understand the basic mechanisms of SPF and its role in email security.
                           Understand the basic mechanisms of DKIM and its role in email security.
                           Understand the basic mechanisms of DMARC and its role in email security.

                         In virtually all distributed environments, electronic mail is the most heavily used
                         network-based application. Users expect to be able to, and do, send email to others
                         who are connected directly or indirectly to the Internet, regardless of host operat-
                         ing system or communications suite. With the explosively growing reliance on email,
                         there grows a demand for authentication and confidentiality services. Two schemes
                         stand out as approaches that enjoy widespread use: Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) and
                         S/MIME. Both are examined in this chapter. This chapter concludes with a discussion
                         of DomainKeys Identified Mail.

             19.1 INTERNET MAIL ARCHITECTURE

                         For an understanding of the topics in this chapter, it is useful to have a basic grasp of
                         the Internet mail architecture, which is currently defined in RFC 5598 (Internet Mail
                         Architecture, July 2009). This section provides an overview of the basic concepts.

Hiva-Network.Com
614 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

         Email Components

          At its most fundamental level, the Internet mail architecture consists of a user world
          in the form of Message User Agents (MUA), and the transfer world, in the form
          of the Message Handling Service (MHS), which is composed of Message Transfer
          Agents (MTA). The MHS accepts a message from one user and delivers it to one
          or more other users, creating a virtual MUA-to-MUA exchange environment. This
          architecture involves three types of interoperability. One is directly between users:
          messages must be formatted by the MUA on behalf of the message author so that
          the message can be displayed to the message recipient by the destination MUA.
          There are also interoperability requirements between the MUA and the MHS--
          first when a message is posted from an MUA to the MHS and later when it is deliv-
          ered from the MHS to the destination MUA. Interoperability is required among the
          MTA components along the transfer path through the MHS.

                  Figure 19.1 illustrates the key components of the Internet mail architecture,
          which include the following.

              Message User Agent (MUA): Operates on behalf of user actors and user
                  applications. It is their representative within the email service. Typically, this
                  function is housed in the user's computer and is referred to as a client email

Message transfer  SMTP     Message transfer  SMTP        Message transfer
  agent (MTA)                agent (MTA)                   agent (MTA)

           SMTP                                          (SMTP,
                                                          local)
Mail submission
  agent (MSA)              MESSAGE HANDLING              Mail delivery
                                SYSTEM (MHS)             agent (MDA)

              ESMTP                              ESMTP
           (Submission)                       (Submission)

Message user                                            Message store
agent (MUA)                                                  (MS)

                                              (IMAP, POP,
                                                   local)

                  Message                                Message user
                   author                                agent (MUA)

                                              Message
                                              recipient

Figure 19.1 Function Modules and Standardized Protocols Used between
                 them in the Internet Mail Architecture
                                       19.1 / INTERNET MAIL ARCHITECTURE 615

       program or a local network email server. The author MUA formats a message
       and performs initial submission into the MHS via a MSA. The recipient MUA
       processes received mail for storage and/or display to the recipient user.

    Mail Submission Agent (MSA): Accepts the message submitted by an MUA
       and enforces the policies of the hosting domain and the requirements of
       Internet standards. This function may be located together with the MUA or
       as a separate functional model. In the latter case, the Simple Mail Transfer
       Protocol (SMTP) is used between the MUA and the MSA.

    Message Transfer Agent (MTA): Relays mail for one application-level hop. It
       is like a packet switch or IP router in that its job is to make routing assessments
       and to move the message closer to the recipients. Relaying is performed by a
       sequence of MTAs until the message reaches a destination MDA. An MTA
       also adds trace information to the message header. SMTP is used between
       MTAs and between an MTA and an MSA or MDA.

    Mail Delivery Agent (MDA): Responsible for transferring the message from
       the MHS to the MS.

    Message Store (MS): An MUA can employ a long-term MS. An MS can be
       located on a remote server or on the same machine as the MUA. Typically,
       an MUA retrieves messages from a remote server using POP (Post Office
       Protocol) or IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol).

       Two other concepts need to be defined. An administrative management
domain (ADMD) is an Internet email provider. Examples include a department that
operates a local mail relay (MTA), an IT department that operates an enterprise
mail relay, and an ISP that operates a public shared email service. Each ADMD
can have different operating policies and trust-based decision making. One obvi-
ous example is the distinction between mail that is exchanged within an organiza-
tion and mail that is exchanged between independent organizations. The rules for
handling the two types of traffic tend to be quite different.

       The Domain Name System (DNS) is a directory lookup service that provides
a mapping between the name of a host on the Internet and its numerical address.
DNS is discussed subsequently in this chapter.

Email Protocols

Two types of protocols are used for transferring email. The first type is used to move
messages through the Internet from source to destination. The protocol used for
this purpose is SMTP, with various extensions and in some cases restrictions. The
second type consists of protocols used to transfer messages between mail servers, of
which IMAP and POP are the most commonly used.

SIMPLE MAIL TRANSFER PROTOCOL SMTP encapsulates an email message in an
envelope and is used to relay the encapsulated messages from source to destination
through multiple MTAs. SMTP was originally specified in 1982 as RFC 821 and has
undergone several revisions, the most current being RFC 5321 (October 2008). These
revisions have added additional commands and introduced extensions. The term
Extended SMTP (ESMTP) is often used to refer to these later versions of SMTP.
616 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

                  SMTP is a text-based client-server protocol where the client (email sender)
          contacts the server (next-hop recipient) and issues a set of commands to tell the
          server about the message to be sent, then sending the message itself. The majority
          of these commands are ASCII text messages sent by the client and a resulting return
          code (and additional ASCII text) returned by the server.

                  The transfer of a message from a source to its ultimate destination can occur
          over a single SMTP client/server conversation over a single TCP connection.
          Alternatively, an SMTP server may be an intermediate relay that assumes the role
          of an SMTP client after receiving a message and then forwards that message to an
          SMTP server along a route to the ultimate destination.

                  The operation of SMTP consists of a series of commands and responses
          exchanged between the SMTP sender and receiver. The initiative is with the SMTP
          sender, who establishes the TCP connection. Once the connection is established,
          the SMTP sender sends commands over the connection to the receiver. Each com-
          mand consists of a single line of text, beginning with a four-letter command code
          followed in some cases by an argument field. Each command generates exactly one
          reply from the SMTP receiver. Most replies are a single-line, although multiple-line
          replies are possible. Each reply begins with a three-digit code and may be followed
          by additional information.

                  Figure 19.2 illustrates the SMTP exchange between a client (C) and server (S).
          The interchange begins with the client establishing a TCP connection to TCP port
          25 on the server (not shown in figure). This causes the server to activate SMTP

                                   S: 220 foo.com Simple Mail Transfer Service Ready
                                   C: HELO bar.com
                                   S: 250 OK
                                   C: MAIL FROM:<Smith@bar.com>
                                   S: 250 OK
                                   C: RCPT TO:<Jones@foo.com>
                                   S: 250 OK
                                   C: RCPT TO:<Green@foo.com>
                                   S: 550 No such user here
                                   C: RCPT TO:<Brown@foo.com>
                                   S: 250 OK
                                   C: DATA
                                   S: 354 Start mail input; end with <crlf>.<crlf>
                                   C: Blah blah blah . . .
                                   C: . . . etc. etc. etc.
                                   C: <crlf><crlf>
                                   S: 250 OK
                                   C: QUIT
                                   S: 221 foo.com Service closing transmission channel

                            Figure 19.2 Example SMTP Transaction Scenario
                                                                19.2 / EMAIL FORMATS 617

        and send a 220 reply to the client. The HELO command identifies the sending
        domain, which the server acknowledges and accepts with a 250 reply. The SMTP
        sender is transmitting mail that originates with the user Smith@bar.com. The MAIL
        command identifies the originator of the message. The message is addressed to
        three users on machine foo.com, namely, Jones, Green, and Brown. The client iden-
        tifies each of these in a separate RCPT command. The SMTP receiver indicates
        that it has mailboxes for Jones and Brown but does not have information on Green.
        Because at least one of the intended recipients has been verified, the client proceeds
        to send the text message, by first sending a DATA command to ensure the server
        is ready for the data. After the server acknowledges receipt of all the data, it issues
        a 250 OK message. Then the client issues a QUIT command and the server closes
        the connection.

               A significant security-related extension for SMTP, called STARTTLS, is
        defined in RFC 3207 (SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over Transport
        Layer Security, February 2002). STARTTLS enables the addition of confidentiality
        and authentication in the exchange between SMTP agents. This gives SMTP agents
        the ability to protect some or all of their communications from eavesdroppers
        and attackers. If the client does initiate the connection over a TLS-enabled port
        (e.g., port 465 was previously used for SMTP over SSL), the server may prompt with
        a message indicating that the STARTTLS option is available. The client can then
        issue the STARTTLS command in the SMTP command stream, and the two parties
        proceed to establish a secure TLS connection. An advantage of using STARTTLS
        is that the server can offer SMTP service on a single port, rather than requiring
        separate port numbers for secure and cleartext operations. Similar mechanisms are
        available for running TLS over IMAP and POP protocols.

               Historically, MUA/MSA message transfers have used SMTP. The standard
        currently preferred is SUBMISSION, defined in RFC 6409 (Message Submission
        for Mail, November 2011). Although SUBMISSION derives from SMTP, it uses a
        separate TCP port and imposes distinct requirements, such as access authorization.

        MAIL ACCESS PROTOCOLS (POP3, IMAP) Post Office Protocol (POP3) allows an
        email client (user agent) to download an email from an email server (MTA). POP3
        user agents connect via TCP to the server (typically port 110). The user agent enters
        a username and password (either stored internally for convenience or entered each
        time by the user for stronger security). After authorization, the UA can issue POP3
        commands to retrieve and delete mail.

               As with POP3, Internet Mail Access Protocol (IMAP) also enables an email
        client to access mail on an email server. IMAP also uses TCP, with server TCP port
        143. IMAP is more complex than POP3. IMAP provides stronger authentication
        than POP3 and provides other functions not supported by POP3.

19.2 EMAIL FORMATS

        To understand S/MIME, we need first to have a general understanding of the
        underlying email format that it uses, namely, MIME. But to understand the sig-
        nificance of MIME, we need to go back to the traditional email format standard,
618 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

          RFC 822, which is still in common use. The most recent version of this format speci-
          fication is RFC 5322 (Internet Message Format, October 2008). Accordingly, this
          section first provides an introduction to these two earlier standards and then moves
          on to a discussion of S/MIME.

         RFC 5322

          RFC 5322 defines a format for text messages that are sent using electronic mail. It
          has been the standard for Internet-based text mail messages and remains in com-
          mon use. In the RFC 5322 context, messages are viewed as having an envelope and
          contents. The envelope contains whatever information is needed to accomplish
          transmission and delivery. The contents compose the object to be delivered to the
          recipient. The RFC 5322 standard applies only to the contents. However, the con-
          tent standard includes a set of header fields that may be used by the mail system to
          create the envelope, and the standard is intended to facilitate the acquisition of such
          information by programs.

                  The overall structure of a message that conforms to RFC 5322 is very simple.
          A message consists of some number of header lines (the header) followed by
          unrestricted text (the body). The header is separated from the body by a blank line.
          Put differently, a message is ASCII text, and all lines up to the first blank line are
          assumed to be header lines used by the user agent part of the mail system.

                  A header line usually consists of a keyword, followed by a colon, followed by
          the keyword's arguments; the format allows a long line to be broken up into several
          lines. The most frequently used keywords are From, To, Subject, and Date. Here is
          an example message:

                  Date: October 8, 2009 2:15:49 PM EDT
                  From: "William Stallings" <ws@shore.net>
                  Subject: The Syntax in RFC 5322
                  To: Smith@Other-host.com
                  Cc: Jones@Yet-Another-Host.com

                  Hello. This section begins the actual
                  message body, which is delimited from the
                  message heading by a blank line.

                  Another field that is commonly found in RFC 5322 headers is Message-ID.
          This field contains a unique identifier associated with this message.

         Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions

          Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) is an extension to the RFC 5322
          framework that is intended to address some of the problems and limitations of the
          use of Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) or some other mail transfer protocol
          and RFC 5322 for electronic mail. RFCs 2045 through 2049 define MIME, and there
          have been a number of updating documents since then.
                                                          19.2 / EMAIL FORMATS 619

       As justification for the use of MIME, [PARZ06] lists the following limitations
of the SMTP/5322 scheme.

   1. SMTP cannot transmit executable files or other binary objects. A number of
       schemes are in use for converting binary files into a text form that can be used
       by SMTP mail systems, including the popular UNIX UUencode/UUdecode
       scheme. However, none of these is a standard or even a de facto standard.

   2. SMTP cannot transmit text data that includes national language characters,
       because these are represented by 8-bit codes with values of 128 decimal or
       higher, and SMTP is limited to 7-bit ASCII.

   3. SMTP servers may reject mail message over a certain size.
   4. SMTP gateways that translate between ASCII and the character code EBCDIC

       do not use a consistent set of mappings, resulting in translation problems.
   5. SMTP gateways to X.400 electronic mail networks cannot handle nontextual

       data included in X.400 messages.
   6. Some SMTP implementations do not adhere completely to the SMTP

       standards defined in RFC 821. Common problems include:
       --Deletion, addition, or reordering of carriage return and linefeed
       --Truncating or wrapping lines longer than 76 characters
       --Removal of trailing white space (tab and space characters)
       --Padding of lines in a message to the same length
       --Conversion of tab characters into multiple space characters

       MIME is intended to resolve these problems in a manner that is compatible
with existing RFC 5322 implementations.

OVERVIEW The MIME specification includes the following elements.

   1. Five new message header fields are defined, which may be included in an
       RFC 5322 header. These fields provide information about the body of the
       message.

   2. A number of content formats are defined, thus standardizing representations
       that support multimedia electronic mail.

   3. Transfer encodings are defined that enable the conversion of any content
       format into a form that is protected from alteration by the mail system.

       In this subsection, we introduce the five message header fields. The next two
subsections deal with content formats and transfer encodings.

       The five header fields defined in MIME are as follows:

    MIME-Version: Must have the parameter value 1.0. This field indicates that
       the message conforms to RFCs 2045 and 2046.

    Content-Type: Describes the data contained in the body with sufficient detail
       that the receiving user agent can pick an appropriate agent or mechanism to
       represent the data to the user or otherwise deal with the data in an appropriate
       manner.
620 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

              Content-Transfer-Encoding: Indicates the type of transformation that has
                  been used to represent the body of the message in a way that is acceptable for
                  mail transport.

              Content-ID: Used to identify MIME entities uniquely in multiple contexts.

              Content-Description: A text description of the object with the body; this is
                  useful when the object is not readable (e.g., audio data).

                  Any or all of these fields may appear in a normal RFC 5322 header. A compli-
          ant implementation must support the MIME-Version, Content-Type, and Content-
          Transfer-Encoding fields; the Content-ID and Content-Description fields are
          optional and may be ignored by the recipient implementation.

          MIME CONTENT TYPES The bulk of the MIME specification is concerned with
          the definition of a variety of content types. This reflects the need to provide stan-
          dardized ways of dealing with a wide variety of information representations in a
          multimedia environment.

                  Table 19.1 lists the content types specified in RFC 2046. There are seven dif-
          ferent major types of content and a total of 15 subtypes. In general, a content type
          declares the general type of data, and the subtype specifies a particular format for
          that type of data.

Table 19.1 MIME Content Types

   Type         Subtype                                    Description
Text         Plain
Multipart    Enriched       Unformatted text; may be ASCII or ISO 8859.
             Mixed          Provides greater format flexibility.
Message                     The different parts are independent but are to be transmitted
             Parallel       together. They should be presented to the receiver in the order
Image                       that they appear in the mail message.
Video        Alternative    Differs from Mixed only in that no order is defined for delivering
Audio                       the parts to the receiver.
Application  Digest         The different parts are alternative versions of the same
                            information. They are ordered in increasing faithfulness to the
             rfc822         original, and the recipient's mail system should display the "best"
             Partial        version to the user.
                            Similar to Mixed, but the default type/subtype of each part is
             External-body  message/rfc822.
             jpeg           The body is itself an encapsulated message that conforms to RFC 822.
             gif            Used to allow fragmentation of large mail items, in a way that is
             mpeg           transparent to the recipient.
             Basic          Contains a pointer to an object that exists elsewhere.
                            The image is in JPEG format, JFIF encoding.
             PostScript     The image is in GIF format.
             octet-stream   MPEG format.
                            Single-channel 8-bit ISDN m-law encoding at a sample rate of
                            8 kHz.
                            Adobe Postscript format.
                            General binary data consisting of 8-bit bytes.
                                                          19.2 / EMAIL FORMATS 621

       For the text type of body, no special software is required to get the full meaning
of the text aside from support of the indicated character set. The primary subtype is
plain text, which is simply a string of ASCII characters or ISO 8859 characters. The
enriched subtype allows greater formatting flexibility.

       The multipart type indicates that the body contains multiple, independent
parts. The Content-Type header field includes a parameter (called boundary) that
defines the delimiter between body parts. This boundary should not appear in
any parts of the message. Each boundary starts on a new line and consists of two
hyphens followed by the boundary value. The final boundary, which indicates the
end of the last part, also has a suffix of two hyphens. Within each part, there may be
an optional ordinary MIME header.

       Here is a simple example of a multipart message containing two parts--both
consisting of simple text (taken from RFC 2046):

       From: Nathaniel Borenstein <nsb@bellcore.com>
       To: Ned Freed <ned@innosoft.com>
       Subject: Sample message
       MIME-Version: 1.0
       Content-type: multipart/mixed; boundary="simple boundary"

       This is the preamble. It is to be ignored, though it is a
       handy place for mail composers to include an explanatory
       note to non-MIME conformant readers.
       --simple boundary

       This is implicitly typed plain ASCII text. It does NOT end
       with a linebreak.
       --simple boundary
       Content-type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii

       This is explicitly typed plain ASCII text. It DOES end
       with a linebreak.

       --simple boundary--
       This is the epilogue. It is also to be ignored.

       There are four subtypes of the multipart type, all of which have the same
overall syntax. The multipart/mixed subtype is used when there are multiple inde-
pendent body parts that need to be bundled in a particular order. For the multipart/
parallel subtype, the order of the parts is not significant. If the recipient's system is
appropriate, the multiple parts can be presented in parallel. For example, a picture
or text part could be accompanied by a voice commentary that is played while the
picture or text is displayed.

       For the multipart/alternative subtype, the various parts are different represen-
tations of the same information. The following is an example:

       From: Nathaniel Borenstein <nsb@bellcore.com>
       To: Ned Freed <ned@innosoft.com>
       Subject: Formatted text mail
           622 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

                                MIME-Version: 1.0

                                Content-Type: multipart/alternative;

                                boundary=boundary42

                                --boundary42

                                Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii

                                     . . . plain text version of message goes here. . . .

                                --boundary42

                                Content-Type: text/enriched

                                     . . . RFC 1896 text/enriched version of same message
                                goes here . . .

                                --boundary42--

                                In this subtype, the body parts are ordered in terms of increasing preference.
                         For this example, if the recipient system is capable of displaying the message in the
                         text/enriched format, this is done; otherwise, the plain text format is used.

                                The multipart/digest subtype is used when each of the body parts is inter-
                         preted as an RFC 5322 message with headers. This subtype enables the construction
                         of a message whose parts are individual messages. For example, the moderator of a
                         group might collect email messages from participants, bundle these messages, and
                         send them out in one encapsulating MIME message.

                                The message type provides a number of important capabilities in MIME.
                         The message/rfc822 subtype indicates that the body is an entire message, including
                         header and body. Despite the name of this subtype, the encapsulated message may
                         be not only a simple RFC 5322 message, but also any MIME message.

                                The message/partial subtype enables fragmentation of a large message into a
                         number of parts, which must be reassembled at the destination. For this subtype,
                         three parameters are specified in the Content-Type: Message/Partial field: an id
                         common to all fragments of the same message, a sequence number unique to each
                         fragment, and the total number of fragments.

                                The message/external-body subtype indicates that the actual data to be con-
                         veyed in this message are not contained in the body. Instead, the body contains the
                         information needed to access the data. As with the other message types, the mes-
                         sage/external-body subtype has an outer header and an encapsulated message with
                         its own header. The only necessary field in the outer header is the Content-Type
                         field, which identifies this as a message/external-body subtype. The inner header is
                         the message header for the encapsulated message. The Content-Type field in the
                         outer header must include an access-type parameter, which indicates the method of
                         access, such as FTP (file transfer protocol).

                                The application type refers to other kinds of data, typically either uninter-
                         preted binary data or information to be processed by a mail-based application.

                         MIME TRANSFER ENCODINGS The other major component of the MIME specifica-
                         tion, in addition to content type specification, is a definition of transfer encodings
                         for message bodies. The objective is to provide reliable delivery across the largest
                         range of environments.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                                          19.2 / EMAIL FORMATS 623

       The MIME standard defines two methods of encoding data. The Content-
Transfer-Encoding field can actually take on six values, as listed in Table 19.2.
However, three of these values (7-bit, 8-bit, and binary) indicate that no encod-
ing has been done but provide some information about the nature of the data. For
SMTP transfer, it is safe to use the 7-bit form. The 8-bit and binary forms may be
usable in other mail transport contexts. Another Content-Transfer-Encoding value
is x-token, which indicates that some other encoding scheme is used for which
a name is to be supplied. This could be a vendor-specific or application-specific
scheme. The two actual encoding schemes defined are quoted-printable and base64.
Two schemes are defined to provide a choice between a transfer technique that is
essentially human readable and one that is safe for all types of data in a way that is
reasonably compact.

       The quoted-printable transfer encoding is useful when the data consists largely
of octets that correspond to printable ASCII characters. In essence, it represents
nonsafe characters by the hexadecimal representation of their code and introduces
reversible (soft) line breaks to limit message lines to 76 characters.

       The base64 transfer encoding, also known as radix-64 encoding, is a common
one for encoding arbitrary binary data in such a way as to be invulnerable to the
processing by mail-transport programs. It is also used in PGP and is described in
Appendix X.

A MULTIPART EXAMPLE Figure 19.3, taken from RFC 2045, is the outline of a com-
plex multipart message. The message has five parts to be displayed serially: two
introductory plain text parts, an embedded multipart message, a richtext part, and
a closing encapsulated text message in a non-ASCII character set. The embedded
multipart message has two parts to be displayed in parallel: a picture and an audio
fragment.

CANONICAL FORM An important concept in MIME and S/MIME is that of canonical
form. Canonical form is a format, appropriate to the content type, that is standard-
ized for use between systems. This is in contrast to native form, which is a format that
may be peculiar to a particular system. RFC 2049 defines these two forms as follows:

    Native form: The body to be transmitted is created in the system's native for-
       mat. The native character set is used and, where appropriate, local end-of-line
       conventions are used as well. The body may be any format that corresponds to

Table 19.2 MIME Transfer Encodings

7 bit             The data are all represented by short lines of ASCII characters.
8 bit
binary            The lines are short, but there may be non-ASCII characters (octets with the
quoted-printable  high-order bit set).
base64
x-token           Not only may non-ASCII characters be present but the lines are not necessarily
                  short enough for SMTP transport.

                  Encodes the data in such a way that if the data being encoded are mostly ASCII
                  text, the encoded form of the data remains largely recognizable by humans.

                  Encodes data by mapping 6-bit blocks of input to 8-bit blocks of output, all of
                  which are printable ASCII characters.

                  A named nonstandard encoding.
624 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

  MIME-Version: 1.0
           From: Nathaniel Borenstein <nsb@bellcore.com>
           To: Ned Freed <ned@innosoft.com>
           Subject: A multipart example
           Content-Type: multipart/mixed;
                boundary=unique-boundary-1
           This is the preamble area of a multipart message. Mail readers that
           understand multipart format should ignore this preamble. If you are reading
           this text, you might want to consider changing to a mail reader that
           understands how to properly display multipart messages.

           --unique-boundary-1
             . . . Some text appears here . . .

           [Note that the preceding blank line means no header fields were given and
           this is text, with charset US ASCII. It could have been done with explicit
           typing as in the next part.]

           --unique-boundary-1
           Content-type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCII
           This could have been part of the previous part, but illustrates explicit
           versus implicit typing of body parts.

           --unique-boundary-1
           Content-Type: multipart/parallel; boundary=unique-boundary-2

           --unique-boundary-2
           Content-Type: audio/basic
           Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

             . . . base64-encoded 8000 Hz single-channel mu-law-format audio data goes
           here . . . .

           --unique-boundary-2
           Content-Type: image/jpeg
           Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

             . . . base64-encoded image data goes here . . . .

           --unique-boundary-2--
           --unique-boundary-1
           Content-type: text/enriched

           This is richtext. as defined in RFC 1896

                Isn't it cool?

           --unique-boundary-1
           Content-Type: message/rfc822

           From: (mailbox in US-ASCII)
           To: (address in US-ASCII)
           Subject: (subject in US-ASCII)
           Content-Type: Text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
           Content-Transfer-Encoding: Quoted-printable

             . . . Additional text in ISO-8859-1 goes here . . .

           --unique-boundary-1--

Figure 19.3 Example MIME Message Structure
                  19.3 / EMAIL THREATS AND COMPREHENSIVE EMAIL SECURITY 625

               the local model for the representation of some form of information. Examples
               include a UNIX-style text file, or a Sun raster image, or a VMS indexed file, and
               audio data in a system-dependent format stored only in memory. In essence,
               the data are created in the native form that corresponds to the type specified
               by the media type.
            Canonical form: The entire body, including out-of-band information such as
               record lengths and possibly file attribute information, is converted to a univer-
               sal canonical form. The specific media type of the body as well as its associated
               attributes dictates the nature of the canonical form that is used. Conversion to
               the proper canonical form may involve character set conversion, transforma-
               tion of audio data, compression, or various other operations specific to the
               various media types.

19.3 EMAIL THREATS AND COMPREHENSIVE EMAIL SECURITY

        For both organizations and individuals, email is both pervasive and especially vul-
        nerable to a wide range of security threats. In general terms, email security threats
        can be classified as follows:

            Authenticity-related threats: Could result in unauthorized access to an enter-
               prise's email system.

            Integrity-related threats: Could result in unauthorized modification of email
               content.

            Confidentiality-related threats: Could result in unauthorized disclosure of
               sensitive information.

            Availability-related threats: Could prevent end users from being able to send
               or receive email.

               A useful list of specific email threats, together with approaches to mitigation,
        is provided in NIST SP 800-177 (Trustworthy Email, September 2015) and is shown
        in Table 19.3.

               SP 800-177 recommends use of a variety of standardized protocols as a means
        for countering these threats. These include:

            STARTTLS: An SMTP security extension that provides authentication, integ-
               rity, non-repudiation (via digital signatures) and confidentiality (via encryp-
               tion) for the entire SMTP message by running SMTP over TLS.

            S/MIME: Provides authentication, integrity, non-repudiation (via digital
               signatures) and confidentiality (via encryption) of the message body carried
               in SMTP messages.

            DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC): Provides authentication and integ-
               rity protection of DNS data, and is an underlying tool used by various email
               security protocols.

            DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE): Is designed to over-
               come problems in the certificate authority (CA) system by providing an
               alternative channel for authenticating public keys based on DNSSEC, with the
626 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Table 19.3 Email Threats and Mitigations

          Threat            Impact on Purported            Impact on Receiver             Mitigation
                                     Sender
Email sent by                                             UBE and/or email         Deployment of domain-
unauthorized MTA in         Loss of reputation, valid     containing malicious     based authentication
enterprise (e.g., malware   email from enterprise         links may be delivered   techniques. Use of
botnet)                     may be blocked as             into user inboxes.       digital signatures over
                            possible spam/phishing                                 email.
Email message sent          attack.                       UBE and/or email         Deployment of domain-
using spoofed or                                          containing malicious     based authentication
unregistered sending        Loss of reputation, valid     links may be delivered   techniques. Use of
domain                      email from enterprise         into user inboxes.       digital signatures over
                            may be blocked as                                      email.
Email message sent          possible spam/phishing        UBE and/or email         Deployment of domain-
using forged sending        attack.                       containing malicious     based authentication
address or email address                                  links may be delivered.  techniques. Use of
(i.e., phishing, spear      Loss of reputation, valid     Users may inadvertently  digital signatures over
phishing)                   email from enterprise         divulge sensitive        email.
                            may be blocked as             information or PII.
                            possible spam/phishing        Leak of sensitive        Use of TLS to encrypt
                            attack.                       information, altered     email transfer between
                                                          message may contain      servers. Use of end-to-
Email modified in transit Leak of sensitive               malicious information.   end email encryption.
                                     information or PII.  Leak of sensitive        Use of TLS to encrypt
                                                          information, altered     email transfer between
Disclosure of sensitive     Leak of sensitive             message may contain      servers. Use of end-to-
information (e.g., PII)     information or PII.           malicious information.   end email encryption.
via monitoring and                                        UBE and/or email         Techniques to address
capturing of email traffic  None, unless purported        containing malicious     UBE.
                            sender is spoofed.            links may be delivered
Unsolicited Bulk Email                                    into user inboxes.       Multiple mail servers,
(UBE) (i.e., spam)                                        Inability to receive     use of cloud-based email
                                                          email.                   providers.
DoS/DDoS attack             Inability to send email.
against an enterprises'
email servers

    result that the same trust relationships used to certify IP addresses are used to
    certify servers operating on those addresses.

 Sender Policy Framework (SPF): Uses the Domain Name System (DNS) to
    allow domain owners to create records that associate the domain name with a
    specific IP address range of authorized message senders. It is a simple matter
    for receivers to check the SPF TXT record in the DNS to confirm that the pur-
    ported sender of a message is permitted to use that source address and reject
    mail that does not come from an authorized IP address.

 DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM): Enables an MTA to sign selected
    headers and the body of a message. This validates the source domain of the
    mail and provides message body integrity.

 Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
    (DMARC): Lets senders know the proportionate effectiveness of their SPF
    and DKIM policies, and signals to receivers what action should be taken in
    various individual and bulk attack scenarios.
                                                                                  19.4 / S/MIME 627

                             sendSerP'sF ITPXaTddsrpeescsfiesDNSSEC secured       DMDMTKAAIRMtshCeaaDntTtnodKsXdeirnnTSIegMdcPteeFeMrilvTlusiTXnsrAeegTsc'seMRipvTiuRnAbgplircokveidyes
                                                                   Sender
                                                                    DNS

                                                                         DKIM
                                                                       signature

msg     Sending                                                     msg                                                Receiving
                                                                                                                         MTA
                        MTA                                        sig
sig                                                                             DAsNpTeELciTSfiLecsSerSAtMifRicTRaPte             msg
                                                                                                                                 sig
Sender  MTA's DKIM                                                   Receiver
MUA       signing key                                                  DNS                                             Receiver
                                                                                                                         MUA
                                                               DNSSEC secured

msg     Sender's S/MIME                                                                                                 Receiver MUA
                                                                                                                       verifies S/MIME
        signing key
                                                                                                                           signature

        (private key)

DANE = DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities
DKIM = DomainKeys Identified Mail
DMARC = Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
DNSSEC = Domain Name System Security Extensions
SPF = Sender Policy Framework
S/MIME = Secure Multi-Purpose Internet Mail Extensions
TLSA RR = Transport Layer Security Authentication Resource Record

Figure 19.4 The Interrelationship of DNSSEC, SPF, DKIM, DMARC, DANE, and
                 S/MIME for Assuring Message Authenticity and Integrity

       Figure 19.4 shows how these components interact to provide message authen-
ticity and integrity. Not shown, for simplicity, is that S/MIME also provides message
confidentiality by encrypting messages.

19.4 S/MIME

        Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (S/MIME) is a security enhancement
        to the MIME Internet email format standard based on technology from RSA Data
        Security. S/MIME is a complex capability that is defined in a number of documents.
        The most important documents relevant to S/MIME include the following:

            RFC 5750, S/MIME Version 3.2 Certificate Handling: Specifies conventions
               for X.509 certificate usage by (S/MIME) v3.2.
628 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

 RFC 5751, S/MIME) Version 3.2 Message Specification: The principal defining
    document for S/MIME message creation and processing.

 RFC 4134, Examples of S/MIME Messages: Gives examples of message bodies
    formatted using S/MIME.

 RFC 2634, Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME: Describes four optional
    security service extensions for S/MIME.

 RFC 5652, Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS): Describes the Crypto-
    graphic Message Syntax (CMS). This syntax is used to digitally sign, digest,
    authenticate, or encrypt arbitrary message content.

 RFC 3370, CMS Algorithms: Describes the conventions for using several
    cryptographic algorithms with the CMS.

 RFC 5752, Multiple Signatures in CMS: Describes the use of multiple, parallel
    signatures for a message.

 RFC 1847, Security Multiparts for MIME--Multipart/Signed and Multipart/
    Encrypted: Defines a framework within which security services may be applied
    to MIME body parts. The use of a digital signature is relevant to S/MIME, as
    explained subsequently.

Operational Description

S/MIME provides for four message-related services: authentication, confidential-
ity, compression, and email compatibility (Table 19.4). This subsection provides
an overview. We then look in more detail at this capability by examining message
formats and message preparation.

AUTHENTICATION Authentication is provided by means of a digital signature, using
the general scheme discussed in Chapter 13 and illustrated in Figure 13.1. Most
commonly RSA with SHA-256 is used. The sequence is as follows:

   1. The sender creates a message.
   2. SHA-256 is used to generate a 256-bit message digest of the message.

Table 19.4 Summary of S/MIME Services

      Function       Typical Algorithm                        Typical Action
Digital signature    RSA/SHA-256
                                          A hash code of a message is created using SHA-256.
Message encryption   AES-128 with CBC     This message digest is encrypted using SHA-256
                                          with the sender's private key and included with
Compression          unspecified          the message.
Email compatibility  Radix-64 conversion
                                          A message is encrypted using AES-128 with CBC
                                          with a one-time session key generated by the
                                          sender. The session key is encrypted using RSA
                                          with the recipient's public key and included with
                                          the message.

                                          A message may be compressed for storage or
                                          transmission.

                                          To provide transparency for email applications, an
                                          encrypted message may be converted to an ASCII
                                          string using radix-64 conversion.
                                                                    19.4 / S/MIME 629

   3. The message digest is encrypted with RSA using the sender's private key, and
       the result is appended to the message. Also appended is identifying information
       for the signer, which will enable the receiver to retrieve the signer's public key.

   4. The receiver uses RSA with the sender's public key to decrypt and recover the
       message digest.

   5. The receiver generates a new message digest for the message and compares
       it with the decrypted hash code. If the two match, the message is accepted as
       authentic.

       The combination of SHA-256 and RSA provides an effective digital signature
scheme. Because of the strength of RSA, the recipient is assured that only the pos-
sessor of the matching private key can generate the signature. Because of the strength
of SHA-256, the recipient is assured that no one else could generate a new message
that matches the hash code and, hence, the signature of the original message.

       Although signatures normally are found attached to the message or file that
they sign, this is not always the case: Detached signatures are supported. A detached
signature may be stored and transmitted separately from the message it signs. This
is useful in several contexts. A user may wish to maintain a separate signature log
of all messages sent or received. A detached signature of an executable program
can detect subsequent virus infection. Finally, detached signatures can be used
when more than one party must sign a document, such as a legal contract. Each
person's signature is independent and therefore is applied only to the document.
Otherwise, signatures would have to be nested, with the second signer signing both
the document and the first signature, and so on.

CONFIDENTIALITY S/MIME provides confidentiality by encrypting messages. Most
commonly AES with a 128-bit key is used, with the cipher block chaining (CBC)
mode. The key itself is also encrypted, typically with RSA, as explained below.

       As always, one must address the problem of key distribution. In S/MIME,
each symmetric key, referred to as a content-encryption key, is used only once. That
is, a new key is generated as a random number for each message. Because it is to be
used only once, the content-encryption key is bound to the message and transmit-
ted with it. To protect the key, it is encrypted with the receiver's public key. The
sequence can be described as follows:

   1. The sender generates a message and a random 128-bit number to be used as a
       content-encryption key for this message only.

   2. The message is encrypted using the content-encryption key.

   3. The content-encryption key is encrypted with RSA using the recipient's public
       key and is attached to the message.

   4. The receiver uses RSA with its private key to decrypt and recover the
       content-encryption key.

   5. The content-encryption key is used to decrypt the message.

       Several observations may be made. First, to reduce encryption time, the com-
bination of symmetric and public-key encryption is used in preference to simply
using public-key encryption to encrypt the message directly: Symmetric algorithms
630 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

          are substantially faster than asymmetric ones for a large block of content. Second,
          the use of the public-key algorithm solves the session-key distribution problem,
          because only the recipient is able to recover the session key that is bound to the
          message. Note that we do not need a session-key exchange protocol of the type
          discussed in Chapter 14, because we are not beginning an ongoing session. Rather,
          each message is a one-time independent event with its own key. Furthermore, given
          the store-and-forward nature of electronic mail, the use of handshaking to assure
          that both sides have the same session key is not practical. Finally, the use of one-
          time symmetric keys strengthens what is already a strong symmetric encryption
          approach. Only a small amount of plaintext is encrypted with each key, and there is
          no relationship among the keys. Thus, to the extent that the public-key algorithm is
          secure, the entire scheme is secure.

          CONFIDENTIALITY AND AUTHENTICATION As Figure 19.5 illustrates, both confi-
          dentiality and encryption may be used for the same message. The figure shows a
          sequence in which a signature is generated for the plaintext message and appended
          to the message. Then the plaintext message and signature are encrypted as a single
          block using symmetric encryption and the symmetric encryption key is encrypted
          using public-key encryption.

                  S/MIME allows the signing and message encryption operations to be per-
          formed in either order. If signing is done first, the identity of the signer is hidden
          by the encryption. Plus, it is generally more convenient to store a signature with a
          plaintext version of a message. Furthermore, for purposes of third-party verifica-
          tion, if the signature is performed first, a third party need not be concerned with the
          symmetric key when verifying the signature.

                  If encryption is done first, it is possible to verify a signature without exposing
          the message content. This can be useful in a context in which automatic signature
          verification is desired, as no private key material is required to verify a signature.
          However, in this case the recipient cannot determine any relationship between the
          signer and the unencrypted content of the message.

          EMAIL COMPATIBILITY When S/MIME is used, at least part of the block to be trans-
          mitted is encrypted. If only the signature service is used, then the message digest is
          encrypted (with the sender's private key). If the confidentiality service is used, the
          message plus signature (if present) are encrypted (with a one-time symmetric key).
          Thus, part or all of the resulting block consists of a stream of arbitrary 8-bit octets.
          However, many electronic mail systems only permit the use of blocks consisting
          of ASCII text. To accommodate this restriction, S/MIME provides the service of
          converting the raw 8-bit binary stream to a stream of printable ASCII characters,
          a process referred to as 7-bit encoding.

                  The scheme typically used for this purpose is Base64 conversion. Each group
          of three octets of binary data is mapped into four ASCII characters. See Appendix
          X for a description.

                  One noteworthy aspect of the Base64 algorithm is that it blindly converts the
          input stream to Base64 format regardless of content, even if the input happens to
          be ASCII text. Thus, if a message is signed but not encrypted and the conversion
          is applied to the entire block, the output will be unreadable to the casual observer,
          which provides a certain level of confidentiality.
                                                                       19.4 / S/MIME 631

                                                                               Receiver's
                                                                               public key

                                             One-time                                     Encrypt
                                             secret key                                 (e.g., RSA)

                   Sender's
                  private key

                  Sign                       Encrypt

msg               (e.g., RSA/  msg           (e.g,                                      msg

                  SHA-256)                   AES-128/

                                             CBC

                               sig                                                      sig

                         (a) Sender signs, then encrypts message

                  Receiver's
                  private key

                                Secret key                                               Sender's
                               generated by                                             public key

                                  sender                                                   Verify
                                                                                         signature
                    Decrypt                                                             (e.g., RSA/
                  (e.g., RSA)                                                           SHA-256)

                               Decrypt

msg                                 (e.g,                         msg

                               AES-128/

                               CBC

sig                                                               sig

                       (b) Receiver decrypts message, then verifies sender's signature
Figure 19.5 Simplified S/MIME Functional Flow

       RFC 5751 also recommends that even if outer 7-bit encoding is not used, the
original MIME content should be 7-bit encoded. The reason for this is that it allows
the MIME entity to be handled in any environment without changing it. For exam-
ple, a trusted gateway might remove the encryption, but not the signature, of a mes-
sage, and then forward the signed message on to the end recipient so that they can
verify the signatures directly. If the transport internal to the site is not 8-bit clean,
such as on a wide area network with a single mail gateway, verifying the signature
will not be possible unless the original MIME entity was only 7-bit data.

COMPRESSION S/MIME also offers the ability to compress a message. This has the
benefit of saving space both for email transmission and for file storage. Compression

Hiva-Network.Com
632 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

          can be applied in any order with respect to the signing and message encryption
          operations. RFC 5751 provides the following guidelines:

              Compression of binary encoded encrypted data is discouraged, since it will not
                  yield significant compression. Base64 encrypted data could very well benefit,
                  however.

              If a lossy compression algorithm is used with signing, you will need to compress
                  first, then sign.

         S/MIME Message Content Types

          S/MIME uses the following message content types, which are defined in RFC 5652,
          Cryptographic Message Syntax:

              Data: Refers to the inner MIME-encoded message content, which may then
                  be encapsulated in a SignedData, EnvelopedData, or CompressedData con-
                  tent type.

              SignedData: Used to apply a digital signature to a message.
              EnvelopedData: This consists of encrypted content of any type and encrypted-

                  content encryption keys for one or more recipients.
              CompressedData: Used to apply data compression to a message.

                  The Data content type is also used for a procedure known as clear signing.
          For clear signing, a digital signature is calculated for a MIME-encoded message and
          the two parts, the message and signature, form a multipart MIME message. Unlike
          SignedData, which involves encapsulating the message and signature in a special
          format, clear-signed messages can be read and their signatures verified by email
          entities that do not implement S/MIME.

         Approved Cryptographic Algorithms

          Table 19.5 summarizes the cryptographic algorithms used in S/MIME. S/MIME
          uses the following terminology taken from RFC 2119 (Key Words for use in RFCs to
          Indicate Requirement Levels, March 1997) to specify the requirement level:

              MUST: The definition is an absolute requirement of the specification. An
                  implementation must include this feature or function to be in conformance
                  with the specification.

              SHOULD: There may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore
                  this feature or function, but it is recommended that an implementation include
                  the feature or function.

                  The S/MIME specification includes a discussion of the procedure for deciding
          which content encryption algorithm to use. In essence, a sending agent has two deci-
          sions to make. First, the sending agent must determine if the receiving agent is capable
          of decrypting using a given encryption algorithm. Second, if the receiving agent is only
          capable of accepting weakly encrypted content, the sending agent must decide if it is
          acceptable to send using weak encryption. To support this decision process, a sending
          agent may announce its decrypting capabilities in order of preference for any message
          that it sends out. A receiving agent may store that information for future use.
                                                    19.4 / S/MIME 633

Table 19.5 Cryptographic Algorithms Used in S/MIME

                   Function                                            Requirement
Create a message digest to be used in
forming a digital signature.               MUST support SHA-256

Use message digest to form a digital       SHOULD support SHA-1
signature.
                                           Receiver SHOULD support MD5 for backward compatibility
Encrypt session key for transmission with
a message.                                 MUST support RSA with SHA-256
                                           SHOULD support
Encrypt message for transmission with a    --DSA with SHA-256
one-time session key.                      --RSASSA-PSS with SHA-256
                                           --RSA with SHA-1
                                           --DSA with SHA-1
                                           --RSA with MD5

                                           MUST support RSA encryption
                                           SHOULD support
                                           --RSAES-OAEP
                                           --Diffie­Hellman ephemeral-static mode

                                           MUST support AES-128 with CBC
                                           SHOULD support
                                           --AES-192 CBC and AES-256 CBC
                                           --Triple DES CBC

       The following rules, in the following order, should be followed by a sending agent.

   1. If the sending agent has a list of preferred decrypting capabilities from an
       intended recipient, it SHOULD choose the first (highest preference) capabil-
       ity on the list that it is capable of using.

   2. If the sending agent has no such list of capabilities from an intended recipient
       but has received one or more messages from the recipient, then the outgoing
       message SHOULD use the same encryption algorithm as was used on the last
       signed and encrypted message received from that intended recipient.

   3. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of the
       intended recipient and is willing to risk that the recipient may not be able to
       decrypt the message, then the sending agent SHOULD use triple DES.

   4. If the sending agent has no knowledge about the decryption capabilities of the
       intended recipient and is not willing to risk that the recipient may not be able
       to decrypt the message, then the sending agent MUST use RC2/40.

       If a message is to be sent to multiple recipients and a common encryption
algorithm cannot be selected for all, then the sending agent will need to send two
messages. However, in that case, it is important to note that the security of the
message is made vulnerable by the transmission of one copy with lower security.

S/MIME Messages

S/MIME makes use of a number of new MIME content types. All of the new applica-
tion types use the designation PKCS. This refers to a set of public-key cryptography
specifications issued by RSA Laboratories and made available for the S/MIME effort.
634 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

                  We examine each of these in turn after first looking at the general procedures
          for S/MIME message preparation.

          SECURING A MIME ENTITY S/MIME secures a MIME entity with a signature,
          encryption, or both. A MIME entity may be an entire message (except for the RFC
          5322 headers), or if the MIME content type is multipart, then a MIME entity is one
          or more of the subparts of the message. The MIME entity is prepared according
          to the normal rules for MIME message preparation. Then the MIME entity plus
          some security-related data, such as algorithm identifiers and certificates, are pro-
          cessed by S/MIME to produce what is known as a PKCS object. A PKCS object is
          then treated as message content and wrapped in MIME (provided with appropriate
          MIME headers). This process should become clear as we look at specific objects
          and provide examples.

                  In all cases, the message to be sent is converted to canonical form. In par-
          ticular, for a given type and subtype, the appropriate canonical form is used for the
          message content. For a multipart message, the appropriate canonical form is used
          for each subpart.

                  The use of transfer encoding requires special attention. For most cases, the
          result of applying the security algorithm will be to produce an object that is partially
          or totally represented in arbitrary binary data. This will then be wrapped in an outer
          MIME message and transfer encoding can be applied at that point, typically base64.
          However, in the case of a multipart signed message (described in more detail later),
          the message content in one of the subparts is unchanged by the security process.
          Unless that content is 7 bit, it should be transfer encoded using base64 or quoted-
          printable so that there is no danger of altering the content to which the signature
          was applied.

                  We now look at each of the S/MIME content types.

          ENVELOPEDDATA An application/pkcs7-mime subtype is used for one of four cat-
          egories of S/MIME processing, each with a unique smime-type parameter. In all
          cases, the resulting entity, (referred to as an object) is represented in a form known
          as Basic Encoding Rules (BER), which is defined in ITU-T Recommendation
          X.209. The BER format consists of arbitrary octet strings and is therefore binary
          data. Such an object should be transfer encoded with base64 in the outer MIME
          message. We first look at envelopedData.

                  The steps for preparing an envelopedData MIME entity are:

              1. Generate a pseudorandom session key for a particular symmetric encryption
                  algorithm (RC2/40 or triple DES).

              2. For each recipient, encrypt the session key with the recipient's public RSA key.

              3. For each recipient, prepare a block known as RecipientInfo that contains
                  an identifier of the recipient's public-key certificate,1 an identifier of the
                  algorithm used to encrypt the session key, and the encrypted session key.

              4. Encrypt the message content with the session key.

             1This is an X.509 certificate, discussed later in this section.
                                                                    19.4 / S/MIME 635

       The RecipientInfo blocks followed by the encrypted content constitute the
envelopedData. This information is then encoded into base64. A sample message
(excluding the RFC 5322 headers) is given below.

       Content-Type: application/pkcs7-mime; smime-type=enveloped-
                    data; name=smime.p7m

       Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
       Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7m

       rfvbnj756tbBghyHhHUujhJhjH77n8HHGT9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6
       7n8HHGghyHhHUujhJh4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYGTrfvbnjT6jH7756tbB9H
       f8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4
       0GhIGfHfQbnj756YT64V

       To recover the encrypted message, the recipient first strips off the base64
encoding. Then the recipient's private key is used to recover the session key. Finally,
the message content is decrypted with the session key.

SIGNEDDATA The signedData smime-type can be used with one or more signers.
For clarity, we confine our description to the case of a single digital signature. The
steps for preparing a signedData MIME entity are as follows.

   1. Select a message digest algorithm (SHA or MD5).
   2. Compute the message digest (hash function) of the content to be signed.
   3. Encrypt the message digest with the signer's private key.
   4. Prepare a block known as SignerInfo that contains the signer's public-key

       certificate, an identifier of the message digest algorithm, an identifier of the
       algorithm used to encrypt the message digest, and the encrypted message
       digest.

       The signedData entity consists of a series of blocks, including a message
digest algorithm identifier, the message being signed, and SignerInfo. The
signedData entity may also include a set of public-key certificates sufficient to
constitute a chain from a recognized root or top-level certification authority to the
signer. This information is then encoded into base64. A sample message (excluding
the RFC 5322 headers) is the following.

       Content-Type: application/pkcs7-mime; smime-type=signed-
                    data; name=smime.p7m

       Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
       Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7m

       567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4f8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7
       77n8HHGT9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6rfvbnj756tbBghyHhHUujhJhjH
       HUujhJh4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYGTrfvbnjT6jH7756tbB9H7n8HHGghyHh
       6YT64V0GhIGfHfQbnj75
636 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

                  To recover the signed message and verify the signature, the recipient first strips
          off the base64 encoding. Then the signer's public key is used to decrypt the message
          digest. The recipient independently computes the message digest and compares it to
          the decrypted message digest to verify the signature.

          CLEAR SIGNING Clear signing is achieved using the multipart content type with
          a signed subtype. As was mentioned, this signing process does not involve trans-
          forming the message to be signed, so that the message is sent "in the clear." Thus,
          recipients with MIME capability but not S/MIME capability are able to read the
          incoming message.

                  A multipart/signed message has two parts. The first part can be any MIME
          type but must be prepared so that it will not be altered during transfer from source
          to destination. This means that if the first part is not 7 bit, then it needs to be encoded
          using base64 or quoted-printable. Then this part is processed in the same manner
          as signedData, but in this case an object with signedData format is created that
          has an empty message content field. This object is a detached signature. It is then
          transfer encoded using base64 to become the second part of the multipart/signed
          message. This second part has a MIME content type of application and a subtype of
          pkcs7-signature. Here is a sample message:

                  Content-Type: multipart/signed;
                       protocol="application/pkcs7-signature";
                       micalg=sha1; boundary=boundary42

                  --boundary42
                  Content-Type: text/plain

                  This is a clear-signed message.

                  --boundary42
                  Content-Type: application/pkcs7-signature; name=smime.p7s
                  Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
                  Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=smime.p7s

                  ghyHhHUujhJhjH77n8HHGTrfvbnj756tbB9HG4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6
                  4VQpfyF467GhIGfHfYT6jH77n8HHGghyHhHUujhJh756tbB9HGTrfvbnj
                  n8HHGTrfvhJhjH776tbB9HG4VQbnj7567GhIGfHfYT6ghyHhHUujpfyF4
                  7GhIGfHfYT64VQbnj756
                  --boundary42--

                  The protocol parameter indicates that this is a two-part clear-signed entity.
          The micalg parameter indicates the type of message digest used. The receiver can
          verify the signature by taking the message digest of the first part and comparing this
          to the message digest recovered from the signature in the second part.

          REGISTRATION REQUEST Typically, an application or user will apply to a certi-
          fication authority for a public-key certificate. The application/pkcs10 S/MIME
                                                                    19.4 / S/MIME 637

entity is used to transfer a certification request. The certification request
includes certificationRequestInfo block, followed by an identifier
of the public-key encryption algorithm, followed by the signature of the
certificationRequestInfo block, made using the sender's private key. The
certificationRequestInfo block includes a name of the certificate subject
(the entity whose public key is to be certified) and a bit-string representation of the
user's public key.

CERTIFICATES-ONLY MESSAGE A message containing only certificates or a certificate
revocation list (CRL) can be sent in response to a registration request. The message
is an application/pkcs7-mime type/subtype with an smime-type parameter of degen-
erate. The steps involved are the same as those for creating a signedData message,
except that there is no message content and the signerInfo field is empty.

S/MIME Certificate Processing

S/MIME uses public-key certificates that conform to version 3 of X.509 (see
Chapter 14). S/MIME managers and/or users must configure each client with a list of
trusted keys and with certificate revocation lists. That is, the responsibility is local for
maintaining the certificates needed to verify incoming signatures and to encrypt outgo-
ing messages. On the other hand, the certificates are signed by certification authorities.

USER AGENT ROLE An S/MIME user has several key management functions to
perform.

    Key generation: The user of some related administrative utility (e.g., one
       associated with LAN management) MUST be capable of generating separate
       Diffie­Hellman and DSS key pairs and SHOULD be capable of generating
       RSA key pairs. Each key pair MUST be generated from a good source of
       nondeterministic random input and be protected in a secure fashion. A user
       agent SHOULD generate RSA key pairs with a length in the range of 768 to
       1024 bits and MUST NOT generate a length of less than 512 bits.

    Registration: A user's public key must be registered with a certification
       authority in order to receive an X.509 public-key certificate.

    Certificate storage and retrieval: A user requires access to a local list of certifi-
       cates in order to verify incoming signatures and to encrypt outgoing messages.
       Such a list could be maintained by the user or by some local administrative
       entity on behalf of a number of users.

Enhanced Security Services

RFC 2634 defines four enhanced security services for S/MIME:

    Signed receipts: A signed receipt may be requested in a SignedData object.
       Returning a signed receipt provides proof of delivery to the originator of a
       message and allows the originator to demonstrate to a third party that the
       recipient received the message. In essence, the recipient signs the entire
       original message plus the original (sender's) signature and appends the new
       signature to form a new S/MIME message.
638 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

              Security labels: A security label may be included in the authenticated attributes
                  of a SignedData object. A security label is a set of security information
                  regarding the sensitivity of the content that is protected by S/MIME encapsu-
                  lation. The labels may be used for access control, by indicating which users are
                  permitted access to an object. Other uses include priority (secret, confidential,
                  restricted, and so on) or role based, describing which kind of people can see
                  the information (e.g., patient's health-care team, medical billing agents).

              Secure mailing lists: When a user sends a message to multiple recipients, a
                  certain amount of per-recipient processing is required, including the use of
                  each recipient's public key. The user can be relieved of this work by employ-
                  ing the services of an S/MIME Mail List Agent (MLA). An MLA can take a
                  single incoming message, perform the recipient-specific encryption for each
                  recipient, and forward the message. The originator of a message need only
                  send the message to the MLA with encryption performed using the MLA's
                  public key.

              Signing certificates: This service is used to securely bind a sender's certificate
                  to their signature through a signing certificate attribute.

  19.5 PRETTY GOOD PRIVACY

          An alternative email security protocol is Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), which has
          essentially the same functionality as S/MIME. PGP was created by Phil Zimmerman
          and implemented as a product first released in 1991. It was made available free of
          charge and became quite popular for personal use. The initial PGP protocol was
          proprietary and used some encryption algorithms with intellectual property restric-
          tions. In 1996, version 5.x of PGP was defined in IETF RFC 1991, PGP Message
          Exchange Formats. Subsequently, OpenPGP was developed as a new standard
          protocol based on PGP version 5.x. OpenPGP is defined in RFC 4880 (OpenPGP
          Message Format, November 2007) and RFC 3156 (MIME Security with OpenPGP,
          August 2001).

                  There are two significant differences between S/MIME and OpenPGP:

              Key Certification: S/MIME uses X.509 certificates that are issued by Certificate
                  Authorities (or local agencies that have been delegated authority by a CA to
                  issue certificates). In OpenPGP, users generate their own OpenPGP public
                  and private keys and then solicit signatures for their public keys from individu-
                  als or organizations to which they are known. Whereas X.509 certificates are
                  trusted if there is a valid PKIX chain to a trusted root, an OpenPGP public key
                  is trusted if it is signed by another OpenPGP public key that is trusted by the
                  recipient. This is called the Web-of-Trust.

              Key Distribution: OpenPGP does not include the sender's public key with
                  each message, so it is necessary for recipients of OpenPGP messages to sepa-
                  rately obtain the sender's public key in order to verify the message. Many
                  organizations post OpenPGP keys on TLS-protected websites: People who
                  wish to verify digital signatures or send these organizations encrypted mail
                                                                           19.6 / DNSSEC 639

               need to manually download these keys and add them to their OpenPGP
               clients. Keys may also be registered with the OpenPGP public key servers,
               which are servers that maintain a database of PGP public keys organized by
               email address. Anyone may post a public key to the OpenPGP key servers,
               and that public key may contain any email address. There is no vetting of
               OpenPGP keys, so users must use the Web-of-Trust to decide whether to trust
               a given public key.

               NIST 800-177 recommends the use of S/MIME rather than PGP because of
        the greater confidence in the CA system of verifying public keys.

               Appendix P provides an overview of PGP.

19.6 DNSSEC

        DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC) are used by several protocols that provide
        email security. This section provides a brief overview of the Domain Name System
        (DNS) and then looks at DNSSEC.

      Domain Name System

        DNS is a directory lookup service that provides a mapping between the name of a
        host on the Internet and its numeric IP address. DNS is essential to the functioning
        of the Internet. The DNS is used by MUAs and MTAs to find the address of the
        next hop server for mail delivery. Sending MTAs query DNS for the Mail Exchange
        Resource Record (MX RR) of the recipient's domain (the right hand side of the
        "@" symbol) in order to find the receiving MTA to contact.

               Four elements comprise the DNS:

            Domain name space: DNS uses a tree-structured name space to identify
               resources on the Internet.

            DNS database: Conceptually, each node and leaf in the name space tree struc-
               ture names a set of information (e.g., IP address, name server for this domain
               name) that is contained in resource record. The collection of all RRs is orga-
               nized into a distributed database.

            Name servers: These are server programs that hold information about a por-
               tion of the domain name tree structure and the associated RRs.

            Resolvers: These are programs that extract information from name servers in
               response to client requests. A typical client request is for an IP address corre-
               sponding to a given domain name.

        THE DNS DATABASE DNS is based on a hierarchical database containing resource
        records (RRs) that include the name, IP address, and other information about hosts.
        The key features of the database are as follows:

            Variable-depth hierarchy for names: DNS allows essentially unlimited levels
               and uses the period (.) as the level delimiter in printed names, as described
               earlier.
640 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Table 19.6 Resource Record Types

  Type                                                       Description
A
                  A host address. This RR type maps the name of a system to its IPv4 address. Some
AAAA              systems (e.g., routers) have multiple addresses, and there is a separate RR for each.
CNAME             Similar to A type, but for IPv6 addresses.
                  Canonical name. Specifies an alias name for a host and maps this to the canonical
HINFO             (true) name.
MINFO             Host information. Designates the processor and operating system used by the host.
MX                Mailbox or mail list information. Maps a mailbox or mail list name to a host name.
                  Mail exchange. Identifies the system(s) via which mail to the queried domain name
NS                should be relayed.
PTR               Authoritative name server for this domain.
SOA               Domain name pointer. Points to another part of the domain name space.
                  Start of a zone of authority (which part of naming hierarchy is implemented). Includes
SRV               parameters related to this zone.
TXT               For a given service provides name of server or servers in domain that provide that service.
WKS               Arbitrary text. Provides a way to add text comments to the database.
                  Well-known services. May list the application services available at this host.

    Distributed database: The database resides in DNS servers scattered through-
       out the Internet.

    Distribution controlled by the database: The DNS database is divided into
       thousands of separately managed zones, which are managed by separate
       administrators. Distribution and update of records is controlled by the database
       software.

       Using this database, DNS servers provide a name-to-address directory service
for network applications that need to locate specific servers. For example, every
time an email message is sent or a Web page is accessed, there must be a DNS name
lookup to determine the IP address of the email server or Web server.

       Table 19.6 lists the various types of resource records.

DNS OPERATION DNS operation typically includes the following steps (Figure 19.6):

   1. A user program requests an IP address for a domain name.

   2. A resolver module in the local host or local ISP queries a local name server in
       the same domain as the resolver.

   3. The local name server checks to see if the name is in its local database or cache,
       and, if so, returns the IP address to the requestor. Otherwise, the name server
       queries other available name servers, if necessary going to the root server, as
       explained subsequently.

   4. When a response is received at the local name server, it stores the name/
       address mapping in its local cache and may maintain this entry for the amount
       of time specified in the time-to-live field of the retrieved RR.

   5. The user program is given the IP address or an error message.

Hiva-Network.Com
                                                                                 19.6 / DNSSEC 641

                                                                                     Cache

                                                                                 Foreign  Database
                                                                                  name
                                                                                  server

  User     user     Name              query          Internet
program   query    resolver      response
                                                                  querreysponse
 User      user    Cache
system   response

                                             Name
                                             server

                                                     Database

                                 Cache

Figure 19.6 DNS Name Resolution

       The distributed DNS database that supports the DNS functionality must be
updated frequently because of the rapid and continued growth of the Internet.
Further, the DNS must cope with dynamic assignment of IP addresses, such as is
done for home DSL users by their ISP. Accordingly, dynamic updating functions
for DNS have been defined. In essence, DNS name servers automatically send out
updates to other relevant name servers as conditions warrant.

DNS Security Extensions

DNSSEC provides end-to-end protection through the use of digital signatures that
are created by responding zone administrators and verified by a recipient's resolver
software. In particular, DNSSEC avoids the need to trust intermediate name servers
and resolvers that cache or route the DNS records originating from the responding
zone administrator before they reach the source of the query. DNSSEC consists of
a set of new resource record types and modifications to the existing DNS protocol,
and is defined in the following documents:

    RFC 4033, DNS Security Introduction and Requirements: Introduces the
       DNS security extensions and describes their capabilities and limitations. The
       document also discusses the services that the DNS security extensions do and
       do not provide.

    RFC 4034, Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions: Defines four
       new resource records that provide security for DNS.
642 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

              RFC 4035, Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions: Defines
                  the concept of a signed zone, along with the requirements for serving and
                  resolving by using DNSSEC. These techniques allow a security-aware resolver
                  to authenticate both DNS resource records and authoritative DNS error
                  indications.

          DNSSEC OPERATION In essence, DNSSEC is designed to protect DNS clients
          from accepting forged or altered DNS resource records. It does this by using digital
          signatures to provide:

              Data origin authentication: Ensures that data has originated from the correct
                  source.

              Data integrity verification: Ensures that the content of a RR has not been
                  modified.

                  The DNS zone administrator digitally signs every Resource Record set
          (RRset) in the zone, and publishes this collection of digital signatures, along with
          the zone administrator's public key, in the DNS itself. In DNSSEC, trust in the pub-
          lic key (for signature verification) of the source is established not by going to a third
          party or a chain of third parties (as in public key infrastructure [PKI] chaining), but
          by starting from a trusted zone (such as the root zone) and establishing the chain of
          trust down to the current source of response through successive verifications of sig-
          nature of the public key of a child by its parent. The public key of the trusted zone
          is called the trust anchor.

          RESOURCE RECORDS FOR DNSSEC RFC 4034 defines four new DNS resource
          records:

              DNSKEY: Contains a public key.

              RRSIG: A resource record digital signature.

              NSEC: Authenticated denial of existence record.

              DS: Delegation signer.

                  An RRSIG is associated with each RRset, where an RRset is the set of
          resource records that have the same label, class, and type. When a client requests
          data, an RRset is returned, together with the associated digital signature in an
          RRSIG record. The client obtains the relevant DNSKEY public key and verifies
          the signature for this RRset.

                  DNSSEC depends on establishing the authenticity of the DNS hierarchy lead-
          ing to the domain name in question, and thus its operation depends on beginning
          the use of cryptographic digital signatures in the root zone. The DS resource record
          facilitates key signing and authentication between DNS zones to create an authen-
          tication chain, or trusted sequence of signed data, from the root of the DNS tree
          down to a specific domain name. To secure all DNS lookups, including those for
          non-existent domain names and record types, DNSSEC uses the NSEC resource
          record to authenticate negative responses to queries. NSEC is used to identify the
                        19.7 / DNS-BASED AUTHENTICATION OF NAMED ENTITIES 643

        range of DNS names or resource record types that do not exist among the sequence
        of domain names in a zone.

19.7 DNS-BASED AUTHENTICATION OF NAMED ENTITIES

        DANE is a protocol to allow X.509 certificates, commonly used for Transport Layer
        Security (TLS), to be bound to DNS names using DNSSEC. It is proposed in RFC
        6698 as a way to authenticate TLS client and server entities without a certificate
        authority (CA).

               The rationale for DANE is the vulnerability of the use of CAs in a global PKI
        system. Every browser developer and operating system supplier maintains a list of
        CA root certificates as trust anchors. These are called the software's root certifi-
        cates and are stored in its root certificate store. The PKIX procedure allows a cer-
        tificate recipient to trace a certificate back to the root. So long as the root certificate
        remains trustworthy, and the authentication concludes successfully, the client can
        proceed with the connection.

               However, if any of the hundreds of CAs operating on the Internet is compro-
        mised, the effects can be widespread. The attacker can obtain the CA's private key,
        get issued certificates under a false name, or introduce new bogus root certificates
        into a root certificate store. There is no limitation of scope for the global PKI and
        a compromise of a single CA damages the integrity of the entire PKI system. In
        addition, some CAs have engaged in poor security practices. For example, some
        CAs have issued wildcard certificates that allow the holder to issue sub-certificates
        for any domain or entity, anywhere in the world.

               The purpose of DANE is to replace reliance on the security of the CA system
        with reliance on the security provided by DNSSEC. Given that the DNS adminis-
        trator for a domain name is authorized to give identifying information about the
        zone, it makes sense to allow that administrator to also make an authoritative bind-
        ing between the domain name and a certificate that might be used by a host at that
        domain name.

      TLSA Record

        DANE defines a new DNS record type, TLSA, that can be used for a secure method
        of authenticating SSL/TLS certificates. The TLSA provides for:

            Specifying constraints on which CA can vouch for a certificate, or which
               specific PKIX end-entity certificate is valid.

            Specifying that a service certificate or a CA can be directly authenticated in
               the DNS itself.

               The TLSA RR enables certificate issue and delivery to be tied to a given
        domain. A server domain owner creates a TLSA resource record that identifies the
        certificate and its public key. When a client receives an X.509 certificate in the TLS
        negotiation, it looks up the TLSA RR for that domain and matches the TLSA data
        against the certificate as part of the client's certificate validation procedure.
644 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Bit: 0                     8               16                 24  31

        Certificate usage     Selector         Matching type

                              Certificate association data

 Figure 19.7 TLSA RR Transmission Format

       Figure 19.7 shows the format of a TLSA RR as it is transmitted to a request-
ing entity. It contains four fields. The Certificate Usage field defines four different
usage models, to accommodate users who require different forms of authentication.
The usage models are:

    PKIX-TA (CA constraint): Specifies which CA should be trusted to authen-
       ticate the certificate for the service. This usage model limits which CA can be
       used to issue certificates for a given service on a host. The server certificate
       chain must pass PKIX validation that terminates with a trusted root certificate
       stored in the client.

    PKIX-EE (service certificate constraint): Defines which specific end entity
       service certificate should be trusted for the service. This usage model limits
       which end entity certificate can be used by a given service on a host. The server
       certificate chain must pass PKIX validation that terminates with a trusted root
       certificate stored in the client.

    DANE-TA (trust anchor assertion): Specifies a domain-operated CA to be
       used as a trust anchor. This usage model allows a domain name administrator
       to specify a new trust anchor--for example, if the domain issues its own certifi-
       cates under its own CA that is not expected to be in the end users' collection
       of trust anchors. The server certificate chain is self-issued and does not need to
       verify against a trusted root stored in the client.

    DANE-EE (domain-issued certificate): Specifies a domain-operated CA to
       be used as a trust anchor. This certificate usage allows a domain name admin-
       istrator to issue certificates for a domain without involving a third-party CA.
       The server certificate chain is self-issued and does not need to verify against a
       trusted root stored in the client.

       The first two usage models are designed to co-exist with and strengthen
the public CA system. The final two usage models operate without the use of
public CAs.

       The Selector field indicates whether the full certificate will be matched or just
the value of the public key. The match is made between the certificate presented
in TLS negotiation and the certificate in the TLSA RR. The Matching Type field
indicates how the match of the certificate is made. The options are exact match,
SHA-256 hash match, or SHA-512 hash match. The Certificate Association Data is
the raw certificate data in hex format.
                                                19.8 / SENDER POLICY FRAMEWORK 645

      Use of DANE for SMTP

        DANE can be used in conjunction with SMTP over TLS, as provided by STARTTLS,
        to more fully secure email delivery. DANE can authenticate the certificate of the
        SMTP submission server that the user's mail client (MUA) communicates with. It
        can also authenticate the TLS connections between SMTP servers (MTAs). The
        use of DANE with SMTP is documented in an Internet Draft (SMTP Security via
        Opportunistic DANE TLS, draft-ietf-dane-smtp-with-dane-19, May 29, 2015).

               As discussed in Section 19.1, SMTP can use the STARTTLS extension to
        run SMTP over TLS, so that the entire email message plus SMTP envelope are
        encrypted. This is done opportunistically, that is, if both sides support STARTTLS.
        Even when TLS is used to provide confidentiality, it is vulnerable to attack in the
        following ways:

            Attackers can strip away the TLS capability advertisement and downgrade the
               connection to not use TLS.

            TLS connections are often unauthenticated (e.g., the use of self-signed certifi-
               cates as well as mismatched certificates is common).

               DANE can address both these vulnerabilities. A domain can use the presence
        of the TLSA RR as an indicator that encryption must be performed, thus prevent-
        ing malicious downgrade. A domain can authenticate the certificate used in the TLS
        connection setup using a DNSSEC-signed TLSA RR.

      Use of DNSSEC for S/MIME

        DNSSEC can be used in conjunction with S/MIME to more fully secure email
        delivery, in a manner similar to the DANE functionality. This use is documented in
        an Internet Draft (Using Secure DNS to Associate Certificates with Domain Names
        for S/MIME, draft-ietf-dane-smime-09, August 27, 2015), which proposes a new
        SMIMEA DNS RR. The purpose of the SMIMEA RR is to associate certificates
        with DNS domain names.

               As discussed in Section 19.4, S/MIME messages often contain certificates
        that can assist in authenticating the message sender and can be used in encrypt-
        ing messages sent in reply. This feature requires that the receiving MUA validate
        the certificate associated with the purported sender. SMIMEA RRs can provide a
        secure means of doing this validation.

               In essence, the SMIMEA RR will have the same format and content as the
        TLSA RR, with the same functionality. The difference is that it is geared to the
        needs of MUAs in dealing with domain names as specified in email addresses in the
        message body, rather than domain names specified in the outer SMTP envelope.

19.8 SENDER POLICY FRAMEWORK

        SPF is the standardized way for a sending domain to identify and assert the mail
        senders for a given domain. The problem that SPF addresses is the following: With
        the current email infrastructure, any host can use any domain name for each of the
646 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

          various identifiers in the mail header, not just the domain name where the host is
          located. Two major drawbacks of this freedom are:

              It is a major obstacle to reducing unsolicited bulk email (UBE), also known as
                  spam. It makes it difficult for mail handlers to filter out emails on the basis of
                  known UBE sources.

              ADMDs (see Section 19.1) are understandably concerned about the ease with
                  which other entities can make use of their domain names, often with malicious
                  intent.

                  RFC 7208 defines the SPF. It provides a protocol by which ADMDs can
          authorize hosts to use their domain names in the "MAIL FROM" or "HELO"
          identities. Compliant ADMDs publish Sender Policy Framework (SPF) records in
          the DNS specifying which hosts are permitted to use their names, and compliant
          mail receivers use the published SPF records to test the authorization of sending
          Mail Transfer Agents (MTAs) using a given "HELO" or "MAIL FROM" identity
          during a mail transaction.

                  SPF works by checking a sender's IP address against the policy encoded in any
          SPF record found at the sending domain. The sending domain is the domain used
          in the SMTP connection, not the domain indicated in the message header as dis-
          played in the MUA. This means that SPF checks can be applied before the message
          content is received from the sender.

                  Figure 19.8 is an example in which SPF would come into play. Assume that the
          sender's IP address is 192.168.0.1. The message arrives from the MTA with domain
          mta.example.net. The sender uses the MAIL FROM tag of alice@example.org,
          indicating that the message originates in the example.org domain. But the message
          header specifies alice.sender@example.net. The receiver uses SPF to query for the
          SPF RR that corresponds to example.com to check if the IP address 192.168.0.1 is

                                     S: 220 foo.com Simple Mail Transfer Service Ready

                                     C: HELO mta.example.net

                                     S: 250 OK

                                     C: MAIL FROM:<alice@example.org>

                                     S: 250 OK

                                     C: RCPT TO:<Jones@foo.com>

                                     S: 250 OK

                                     C: DATA

                                     S: 354 Start mail input; end with <crlf>.<crlf>

                                     C: To: bob@foo.com

                                     C: From: alice.sender@example.net

                                     C: Date: Today

                                     C: Subject: Meeting Today

                                       ...

                              Figure 19.8 Example in which SMTP Envelope Header Does
                                                Not Match Message Header
                                         19.8 / SENDER POLICY FRAMEWORK 647

listed as a valid sender, and then takes appropriate action based on the results of
checking the RR.

SPF on the Sender Side

A sending domain needs to identify all the senders for a given domain and add
that information into the DNS as a separate resource record. Next, the sending
domain encodes the appropriate policy for each sender using the SPF syntax. The
encoding is done in a TXT DNS resource record as a list of mechanisms and mod-
ifiers. Mechanisms are used to define an IP address or range of addresses to be
matched, and modifiers indicate the policy for a given match. Table 19.7 lists the
most important mechanisms and modifiers used in SPF.

       The SPF syntax is fairly complex and can express complex relationships
between senders. For more detail, see RFC 7208.

SPF on the Receiver Side

If SPF is implemented at a receiver, the SPF entity uses the SMTP envelope MAIL
FROM: address domain and the IP address of the sender to query an SPF TXT RR.
The SPF checks can be started before the body of the email message is received,

Table 19.7 Common SPF Mechanisms and Modifiers

   Tag                                             Description
    ip4
    ip6   Specifies an IPv4 address or range of addresses that are authorized senders for
    mx    a domain.
 include
          Specifies an IPv6 address or range of addresses that are authorized senders for
    all   a domain.
          Asserts that the listed hosts for the Mail Exchange RRs are also valid senders for
Modifier  the domain.
     +    Lists another domain where the receiver should look for an SPF RR for further
     -    senders. This can be useful for large organizations with many domains or
          sub-domains that have a single set of shared senders. The include mechanism is
     ?    recursive, in that the SPF check in the record found is tested in its entirety before
          proceeding. It is not simply a concatenation of the checks.
          Matches every IP address that has not otherwise been matched.

                                    (a) SPF Mechanisms

                                                   Description

          The given mechanism check must pass. This is the default mechanism and does not
          need to be explicitly listed.

          The given mechanism is not allowed to send email on behalf of the domain.

          The given mechanism is in transition and if an email is seen from the listed host/IP
          address, then it should be accepted but marked for closer inspection.

          The SPF RR explicitly states nothing about the mechanism. In this case, the default
          behavior is to accept the email. (This makes it equivalent to = + > unless some sort of
          discrete or aggregate message review is conducted.)

                             (b) SPF Mechanism Modifiers
648 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Sender   Inbound                                        Inbox
        mail server                                 Junk email
                                                    Quarantine
        Internet            Authorization  Further  Block/delete
                               pass/fail    policy
                SPF record                 checks
                   lookup

                                                              DNS

    Figure 19.9 Sender Policy Framework Operation

        which may result in blocking the transmission of the email content. Alternatively,
        the entire message can be absorbed and buffered until all the checks are finished.
        In either case, checks must be completed before the mail message is sent to the end
        user's inbox.

               The checking involves the following rules:

           1. If no SPF TXT RR is returned, the default behavior is to accept the message.
           2. If the SPF TXT RR has formatting errors, the default behavior is to accept the

               message.
           3. Otherwise the mechanisms and modifiers in the RR are used to determine

               disposition of the email message.

               Figure 19.9 illustrates SPF operation.

19.9 DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL

        DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is a specification for cryptographically
        signing email messages, permitting a signing domain to claim responsibility for a
        message in the mail stream. Message recipients (or agents acting in their behalf)
        can verify the signature by querying the signer's domain directly to retrieve the
        appropriate public key and thereby can confirm that the message was attested to
        by a party in possession of the private key for the signing domain. DKIM is an
        Internet Standard (RFC 6376: DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures).
        DKIM has been widely adopted by a range of email providers, including
        corporations, government agencies, gmail, Yahoo!, and many Internet Service
        Providers (ISPs).
                                                             19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 649

                    Email Threats

                         RFC 4686 (Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys Identified Mail) describes
                         the threats being addressed by DKIM in terms of the characteristics, capabilities,
                         and location of potential attackers.

                         CHARACTERISTICS RFC 4686 characterizes the range of attackers on a spectrum of
                         three levels of threat.

                            1. At the low end are attackers who simply want to send email that a recipient
                                does not want to receive. The attacker can use one of a number of commercially
                                available tools that allow the sender to falsify the origin address of messages.
                                This makes it difficult for the receiver to filter spam on the basis of originating
                                address or domain.

                            2. At the next level are professional senders of bulk spam mail. These attackers
                                often operate as commercial enterprises and send messages on behalf of third
                                parties. They employ more comprehensive tools for attack, including Mail
                                Transfer Agents (MTAs) and registered domains and networks of compro-
                                mised computers (zombies), to send messages and (in some cases) to harvest
                                addresses to which to send.

                            3. The most sophisticated and financially motivated senders of messages are
                                those who stand to receive substantial financial benefit, such as from an email-
                                based fraud scheme. These attackers can be expected to employ all of the
                                above mechanisms and additionally may attack the Internet infrastructure
                                itself, including DNS cache-poisoning attacks and IP routing attacks.

                         CAPABILITIES RFC 4686 lists the following as capabilities that an attacker might
                         have.

                            1. Submit messages to MTAs and Message Submission Agents (MSAs) at
                                multiple locations in the Internet.

                            2. Construct arbitrary Message Header fields, including those claiming to be
                                mailing lists, resenders, and other mail agents.

                            3. Sign messages on behalf of domains under their control.
                            4. Generate substantial numbers of either unsigned or apparently signed

                                messages that might be used to attempt a denial-of-service attack.
                            5. Resend messages that may have been previously signed by the domain.
                            6. Transmit messages using any envelope information desired.
                            7. Act as an authorized submitter for messages from a compromised computer.
                            8. Manipulation of IP routing. This could be used to submit messages from

                                specific IP addresses or difficult-to-trace addresses, or to cause diversion of
                                messages to a specific domain.
                            9. Limited influence over portions of DNS using mechanisms such as cache
                                poisoning. This might be used to influence message routing or to falsify adver-
                                tisements of DNS-based keys or signing practices.

Hiva-Network.Com
650 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

            10. Access to significant computing resources, for example, through the conscrip-
                  tion of worm-infected "zombie" computers. This could allow the "bad actor" to
                  perform various types of brute-force attacks.

            11. Ability to eavesdrop on existing traffic, perhaps from a wireless network.

          LOCATION DKIM focuses primarily on attackers located outside of the administra-
          tive units of the claimed originator and the recipient. These administrative units
          frequently correspond to the protected portions of the network adjacent to the orig-
          inator and recipient. It is in this area that the trust relationships required for authen-
          ticated message submission do not exist and do not scale adequately to be practical.
          Conversely, within these administrative units, there are other mechanisms (such as
          authenticated message submission) that are easier to deploy and more likely to be
          used than DKIM. External bad actors are usually attempting to exploit the "any-to-
          any" nature of email that motivates most recipient MTAs to accept messages from
          anywhere for delivery to their local domain. They may generate messages without
          signatures, with incorrect signatures, or with correct signatures from domains with
          little traceability. They may also pose as mailing lists, greeting cards, or other agents
          that legitimately send or resend messages on behalf of others.

         DKIM Strategy

          DKIM is designed to provide an email authentication technique that is transparent
          to the end user. In essence, a user's email message is signed by a private key of the
          administrative domain from which the email originates. The signature covers all of
          the content of the message and some of the RFC 5322 message headers. At the
          receiving end, the MDA can access the corresponding public key via a DNS and
          verify the signature, thus authenticating that the message comes from the claimed
          administrative domain. Thus, mail that originates from somewhere else but claims
          to come from a given domain will not pass the authentication test and can be
          rejected. This approach differs from that of S/MIME and PGP, which use the origi-
          nator's private key to sign the content of the message. The motivation for DKIM is
          based on the following reasoning:2

              1. S/MIME depends on both the sending and receiving users employing S/MIME.
                  For almost all users, the bulk of incoming mail does not use S/MIME, and the
                  bulk of the mail the user wants to send is to recipients not using S/MIME.

              2. S/MIME signs only the message content. Thus, RFC 5322 header information
                  concerning origin can be compromised.

              3. DKIM is not implemented in client programs (MUAs) and is therefore trans-
                  parent to the user; the user need not take any action.

              4. DKIM applies to all mail from cooperating domains.
              5. DKIM allows good senders to prove that they did send a particular message

                  and to prevent forgers from masquerading as good senders.

             2 The reasoning is expressed in terms of the use of S/MIME. The same argument applies to PGP.
                                19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 651

                                  SMTP
        MTA                                                             MTA

SMTP                                                                         SMTP

Signer  MSA                     DNS Public key query/response           MDA  Verifier
                           DNS                               POP, IMAP

             SMTP

                                MUA

             MUA

Mail origination                Mail delivery
     network                       network

           DNS = Domain Name System
           MDA = Mail Delivery Agent
           MSA = Mail Submission Agent
           MTA = Message Transfer Agent
           MUA = Message User Agent

Figure 19.10 Simple Example of DKIM Deployment

       Figure 19.10 is a simple example of the operation of DKIM. We begin with a
message generated by a user and transmitted into the MHS to an MSA that is within
the user's administrative domain. An email message is generated by an email client
program. The content of the message, plus selected RFC 5322 headers, is signed by
the email provider using the provider's private key. The signer is associated with a
domain, which could be a corporate local network, an ISP, or a public email facility
such as gmail. The signed message then passes through the Internet via a sequence
of MTAs. At the destination, the MDA retrieves the public key for the incoming
signature and verifies the signature before passing the message on to the destination
email client. The default signing algorithm is RSA with SHA-256. RSA with SHA-1
also may be used.

DKIM Functional Flow

Figure 19.11 provides a more detailed look at the elements of DKIM operation.
Basic message processing is divided between a signing Administrative Management
Domain (ADMD) and a verifying ADMD. At its simplest, this is between the origi-
nating ADMD and the delivering ADMD, but it can involve other ADMDs in the
handling path.

       Signing is performed by an authorized module within the signing ADMD
and uses private information from a Key Store. Within the originating ADMD,
652 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Private                              RFC 5322 message
  key          Originating or relaying ADMD:
 store
                   Sign message with SDID
(paired)
                        Internet
Public
  key          Relaying or delivering ADMD:            Remote
 store                  Message signed?                 sender
                                                       practices

                     yes                   no

                Verify
               signature

               pass                fail

               Assessments

                                            Check
                                            signing
                                           practices

Reputation/                                Message     Local info
accreditation                              filtering   on sender
information                                 engine     practices

Figure 19.11 DKIM Functional Flow

this might be performed by the MUA, MSA, or an MTA. Verifying is performed
by an authorized module within the verifying ADMD. Within a delivering
ADMD, verifying might be performed by an MTA, MDA or MUA. The mod-
ule verifies the signature or determines whether a particular signature was
required. Verifying the signature uses public information from the Key Store.
If the signature passes, reputation information is used to assess the signer and
that information is passed to the message filtering system. If the signature fails
or there is no signature using the author's domain, information about signing
practices related to the author can be retrieved remotely and/or locally, and that
information is passed to the message filtering system. For example, if the sender
(e.g., gmail) uses DKIM but no DKIM signature is present, then the message
may be considered fraudulent.
                                        19.9 / DOMAINKEYS IDENTIFIED MAIL 653

       The signature is inserted into the RFC 5322 message as an additional header
entry, starting with the keyword Dkim-Signature. You can view examples from your
own incoming mail by using the View Long Headers (or similar wording) option for
an incoming message. Here is an example:

Dkim-Signature:  v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed;
                 d=gmail.com; s=gamma; h=domainkey-
                 signature:mime-version:received:date:
                 message-id:subject :from:to:content-type:
                 content-transfer-encoding;
                 bh=5mZvQDyCRuyLb1Y28K4zgS2MPOemFToDBgvbJ
                 7GO90s=;
                 b=PcUvPSDygb4ya5Dyj1rbZGp/VyRiScuaz7TTG
                 J5qW5slM+klzv6kcfYdGDHzEVJW+Z
                 FetuPfF1ETOVhELtwH0zjSccOyPkEiblOf6gILO
                 bm3DDRm3Ys1/FVrbhVOlA+/jH9Aei
                 uIIw/5iFnRbSH6qPDVv/beDQqAWQfA/wF7O5k=

       Before a message is signed, a process known as canonicalization is performed
on both the header and body of the RFC 5322 message. Canonicalization is necessary
to deal with the possibility of minor changes in the message made en route, includ-
ing character encoding, treatment of trailing white space in message lines, and the
"folding" and "unfolding" of header lines. The intent of canonicalization is to make a
minimal transformation of the message (for the purpose of signing; the message itself
is not changed, so the canonicalization must be performed again by the verifier) that
will give it its best chance of producing the same canonical value at the receiving end.
DKIM defines two header canonicalization algorithms ("simple" and "relaxed") and
two for the body (with the same names). The simple algorithm tolerates almost no
modification, while the relaxed algorithm tolerates common modifications.

       The signature includes a number of fields. Each field begins with a tag consist-
ing of a tag code followed by an equals sign and ends with a semicolon. The fields
include the following:

    v= DKIM version/

    a= Algorithm used to generate the signature; must be either rsa-sha1 or
       rsa-sha256

    c= Canonicalization method used on the header and the body.

    d= A domain name used as an identifier to refer to the identity of a responsible
       person or organization. In DKIM, this identifier is called the Signing Domain
       IDentifier (SDID). In our example, this field indicates that the sender is using
       a gmail address.

    s= In order that different keys may be used in different circumstances for the
       same signing domain (allowing expiration of old keys, separate departmen-
       tal signing, or the like), DKIM defines a selector (a name associated with a
       key) that is used by the verifier to retrieve the proper key during signature
       verification.
654 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

              h= Signed Header fields. A colon-separated list of header field names that
                  identify the header fields presented to the signing algorithm. Note that in our
                  example above, the signature covers the domainkey-signature field. This refers
                  to an older algorithm (since replaced by DKIM) that is still in use.

              bh= The hash of the canonicalized body part of the message. This provides
                  additional information for diagnosing signature verification failures.

              b= The signature data in base64 format; this is the encrypted hash code.

  19.10 DOMAIN-BASED MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION,
          REPORTING, AND CONFORMANCE

          Domain-Based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)
          allows email senders to specify policy on how their mail should be handled, the
          types of reports that receivers can send back, and the frequency those reports
          should be sent. It is defined in RFC 7489 (Domain-based Message Authentication,
          Reporting, and Conformance, March 2015).

                  DMARC works with SPF and DKIM. SPF and DKM enable senders to advise
          receivers, via DNS, whether mail purporting to come from the sender is valid, and
          whether it should be delivered, flagged, or discarded. However, neither SPF nor
          DKIM include a mechanism to tell receivers if SPF or DKIM are in use, nor do they
          have feedback mechanism to inform senders of the effectiveness of the anti-spam
          techniques. For example, if a message arrives at a receiver without a DKIM signa-
          ture, DKIM provides no mechanism to allow the receiver to learn if the message is
          authentic but was sent from a sender that did not implement DKIM, or if the mes-
          sage is a spoof. DMARC addresses these issues essentially by standardizing how
          email receivers perform email authentication using SPF and DKIM mechanisms.

         Identifier Alignment

          DKIM, SPF, and DMARC authenticate various aspects of an individual mes-
          sage. DKIM authenticates the domain that affixed a signature to the message. SPF
          focuses on the SMTP envelope, defined in RFC 5321. It can authenticate either the
          domain that appears in the MAIL FROM portion of the SMTP envelope or the
          HELO domain, or both. These may be different domains, and they are typically not
          visible to the end user.

                  DMARC authentication deals with the From domain in the message header,
          as defined in RFC 5322. This field is used as the central identity of the DMARC
          mechanism because it is a required message header field and therefore guaranteed
          to be present in compliant messages, and most MUAs represent the RFC 5322 From
          field as the originator of the message and render some or all of this header field's
          content to end users. The email address in this field is the one used by end users to
          identify the source of the message and therefore is a prime target for abuse.

                  DMARC requires that From address match (be aligned with) an Authenticated
          Identifier from DKIM or SPF. In the case of DKIM, the match is made between
          the DKIM signing domain and the From domain. In the case of SPF, the match is
          between the SPF-authenticated domain and the From domain.
                       19.10 / DOMAIN-BASED MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION 655

DMARC on the Sender Side

A mail sender that uses DMARC must also use SPF or DKIM, or both. The sender
posts a DMARC policy in the DNS that advises receivers on how to treat messages
that purport to originate from the sender's domain. The policy is in the form of
a DNS TXT resource record. The sender also needs to establish email addresses
to receive aggregate and forensic reports. As these email addresses are published
unencrypted in the DNS TXT RR, they are easily discovered, leaving the poster
subject to unsolicited bulk email. Thus, the poster of the DNS TXT RR needs to
employ some kind of abuse countermeasures.

       Similar to SPF and DKIM, the DMARC policy in the TXT RR is encoded
in a series of tag=value pairs separated by semicolons. Table 19.8 describes the
common tags.

       Once the DMARC RR is posted, messages from the sender are typically
processed as follows:

   1. The domain owner constructs an SPF policy and publishes it in its DNS
       database. The domain owner also configures its system for DKIM signing.
       Finally, the domain owner publishes via the DNS a DMARC message-handling
       policy.

   2. The author generates a message and hands the message to the domain owner's
       designated mail submission service.

   3. The submission service passes relevant details to the DKIM signing module in
       order to generate a DKIM signature to be applied to the message.

   4. The submission service relays the now-signed message to its designated trans-
       port service for routing to its intended recipient(s).

DMARC on the Receiver Side

A message generated on the sender side may pass through other relays but even-
tually arrives at a receiver's transport service. The typical processing order for
DMARC on the receiving side is the following:

   1. The receiver performs standard validation tests, such as checking against IP
       blocklists and domain reputation lists, as well as enforcing rate limits from a
       particular source.

   2. The receiver extracts the RFC 5322 From address from the message. This must
       contain a single, valid address or else the mail is refused as an error.

   3. The receiver queries for the DMARC DNS record based on the sending do-
       main. If none exists, terminate DMARC processing.

   4. The receiver performs DKIM signature checks. If more than one DKIM signa-
       ture exists in the message, one must verify.

   5. The receiver queries for the sending domain's SPF record and performs SPF
       validation checks.

   6. The receiver conducts Identifier Alignment checks between the RFC 5321
       From and the results of the SPF and DKIM records (if present).
656 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

Table 19.8 DMARC Tag and Value Descriptions

       Tag (Name)                                                Description
v= (Version)
p= (Policy)               Version field that must be present as the first element. By default the value is
                          always DMARC1.
aspf= (SPF Policy)
                          Mandatory policy field. May take values none or quarantine or reject. This
adkim= (DKIM              allows for a gradually tightening policy where the sender domain recommends
                          no specific action on mail that fails DMARC checks (p= none), through treating
Policy)                   failed mail as suspicious (p= quarantine), to rejecting all failed mail
                          (p= reject), preferably at the SMTP transaction stage.
fo= (Failure reporting
                          Values are r (default) for relaxed and s for strict SPF domain enforcement. Strict
options)                  alignment requires an exact match between the From address domain and the
                          (passing) SPF check must exactly match the MailFrom address (HELO address).
ruf=                      Relaxed requires that only the From and MailFrom address domains be in
rua=                      alignment. For example, the MailFrom address domain smtp.example.org and the
                          From address announce@example.org are in alignment, but not a strict match.
ri= (Reporting interval)
pct= (Percent)            Optional. Values are r (default) for relaxed and s for strict DKIM domain
                          enforcement. Strict alignment requires an exact match between the From
sp= (Receiver Policy)     domain in the message header and the DKIM domain presented in the
                          (d= DKIM), tag. Relaxed requires only that the domain part is in alignment
                          (as in aspf).

                          Optional. Ignore if a ruf argument is not also present. Value 0 indicates the
                          receiver should generate a DMARC failure report if all underlying mechanisms
                          fail to produce an aligned pass result. Value 1 means generate a DMARC failure
                          report if any underlying mechanism produces something other than an aligned
                          pass result. Other possible values are d (generate a DKIM failure report if a
                          signature failed evaluation), and s (generate an SPF failure report if the message
                          failed SPF evaluation). These values are not exclusive and may be combined.

                          Optional, but requires the fo argument to be present. Lists a series of URIs
                          (currently just mailto:<emailaddress>) that list where to send forensic feedback
                          reports. This is for reports on message-specific failures.

                          Optional list of URIs (like in ruf= , using the mailto: URI) listing where to
                          send aggregate feedback back to the sender. These reports are sent based on the
                          interval requested using the ri= option with a default of 86400 seconds if not
                          listed.

                          Optional with the default value of 86400 seconds. The value listed is the
                          reporting interval desired by the sender.

                          Optional with the default value of 100. Expresses the percentage of a sender's
                          mail that should be subject to the given DMARC policy. This allows senders to
                          ramp up their policy enforcement gradually and prevent having to commit to a
                          rigorous policy before getting feedback on their existing policy.

                          Optional with a default value of none. Other values include the same range
                          of values as the p= argument. This is the policy to be applied to mail from all
                          identified subdomains of the given DMARC RR.

7. The results of these steps are passed to the DMARC module along with the
   Author's domain. The DMARC module attempts to retrieve a policy from the
   DNS for that domain. If none is found, the DMARC module determines the
   organizational domain and repeats the attempt to retrieve a policy from the DNS.

8. If a policy is found, it is combined with the Author's domain and the SPF and
   DKIM results to produce a DMARC policy result (a "pass" or "fail") and can
   optionally cause one of two kinds of reports to be generated.
                      19.10 / DOMAIN-BASED MESSAGE AUTHENTICATION, 657

   9. Recipient transport service either delivers the message to the recipient inbox
       or takes other local policy action based on the DMARC result.

  10. When requested, Recipient transport service collects data from the message
       delivery session to be used in providing feedback.

       Figure 19.12, based on one at DMARC.org, summarizes the sending and
receiving functional flow.

Sender                                          Receiver

Author composes                                 Standard processing
and sends email                                 (including antispam)

              DKIM         Retrieve verified                         Pass
                           DKIM domains
      SPF                                                             Apply
   Sending mail server           DKIM                               DMARC
attaches DKIM signature
                                                      SPF             policy
       Update periodic
      aggregate report                                  Retrieve      Fail
     to be sent to sender                          "envelope from"

           Failure                                      via SPF
            report
                           Standard validation  Block               Quaran-
                             tests at receiver                        tine
                               (including IP
                                blocklists,
                             reputation, rate
                                limits, etc)

Figure 19.12 DMARC Functional Flow
           658 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

                    DMARC Reports

                         DMARC reporting provides the sender's feedback on their SPF, DKIM, Identifier
                         Alignment, and message disposition policies, which enable the sender to make
                         these policies more effective. Two types of reports are sent: aggregate reports and
                         forensic reports.

                                Aggregate reports are sent by receivers periodically and include aggregate
                         figures for successful and unsuccessful message authentications, including:

                             The sender's DMARC policy for that interval.
                             The message disposition by the receiver (i.e., delivered, quarantined, rejected).
                             SPF result for a given SPF identifier.
                             DKIM result for a given DKIM identifier.
                             Whether identifiers are in alignment or not.
                             Results classified by sender subdomain.
                             The sending and receiving domain pair.
                             The policy applied, and whether this is different from the policy requested.
                             The number of successful authentications.
                             Totals for all messages received.

                                This information enables the sender to identify gaps in email infrastruc-
                         ture and policy. SP 800-177 recommends that a sending domain begin by setting
                         a DMARC policy of p= none, so that the ultimate disposition of a message that
                         fails some check is determined by the receiver's local policy. As DMARC aggregate
                         reports are collected, the sender will have a quantitatively better assessment of the
                         extent to which the sender's email is authenticated by outside receivers, and will
                         be able to set a policy of p =reject, indicating that any message that fails the SPF,
                         DKIM, and alignment checks really should be rejected. From their own traffic anal-
                         ysis, receivers can develop a determination of whether a sender's p =reject policy is
                         sufficiently trustworthy to act on.

                                A forensic report helps the sender refine the component SPF and DKIM
                         mechanisms as well as alerting the sender that their domain is being used as part
                         of a phishing/spam campaign. Forensic reports are similar in format to aggregation
                         reports, with these changes:

                             Receivers include as much of the message and message header as is reason-
                                able to allow the domain to investigate the failure. Add an Identity-Alignment
                                field, with DKIM and SPF DMARC-method fields as appropriate.

                             Optionally add a Delivery-Result field.
                             Add DKIM Domain, DKIM Identity, and DKIM selector fields, if the message

                                was DKIM signed. Optionally also add DKIM Canonical header and body
                                fields.
                             Add an additional DMARC authentication failure type, for use when some
                                authentication mechanisms fail to produce aligned identifiers.

Hiva-Network.Com
                           19.11 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 659
  19.11 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS
Key Terms

administrative management       Domain Name System (DNS)       Message User Agent (MUA)
    domain (ADMD)               DomainKeys Identified Mail     Multipurpose Internet Mail

base64                              (DKIM)                         Extensions (MIME)
Cryptographic Message           electronic mail                Post Office Protocol (POP3)
                                Internet Mail Access Protocol  Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
    Syntax (CMS)                                               Sender Policy Framework
detached signature                  (IMAP)
DNS-based Authentication of     Mail Delivery Agent (MDA)          (SPF)
                                Mail Submission Agent          session key
    Named Entities (DANE)                                      Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
DNS Security Extensions             (MSA)
                                Message Handling Service           (SMTP)
    (DNSSEC)                                                   STARTTLS
Domain-based Message                (MHS)                      SUBMISSION
                                Message Store                  S/MIME
    Authentication, Reporting,  Message Transfer Agents        trust
    and Conformance
    (DMARC)                         (MTA)

Review Questions

 19.1 What types of interoperability issues are involved in internet mail architecture and
          how are they handled?

 19.2 What are the SMTP and MIME standards?
 19.3 What is the difference between a MIME content type and a MIME transfer encoding?
 19.4 Briefly explain base64 encoding.
 19.5 Why is base64 conversion useful for an email application?
 19.6 What is S/MIME?
 19.7 What are the four principal services provided by S/MIME?
 19.8 What is the utility of a detached signature?
 19.9 What is DKIM?

Problems

 19.1 The character sequence "<CR><LF>.<CR><LF>" indicates the end of mail data to a
          SMTP-server. What happens if the mail data itself contains that character sequence?

 19.2 What are POP3 and IMAP?
 19.3 If a lossless compression algorithm, such as ZIP, is used with S/MIME, why is it pref-

          erable to generate a signature before applying compression?
 19.4 Before the deployment of the Domain Name System, a simple text file (HOSTS.

          TXT) centrally maintained at the SRI Network Information Center was used to
          enable mapping between host names and addresses. Each host connected to the
          Internet had to have an updated local copy of it to be able to use host names instead
          of having to cope directly with their IP addresses. Discuss the main advantages of the
          DNS over the old centralized HOSTS.TXT system.
 19.5 For this problem and the next few, consult Appendix P. In Figure P.2, each entry in
          the public-key ring contains an Owner Trust field that indicates the degree of trust
          associated with this public-key owner. Why is that not enough? That is, if this owner
          is trusted and this is supposed to be the owner's public key, why is that trust not
          enough to permit PGP to use this public key?
660 CHAPTER 19 / ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY

 19.6  What is the basic difference between X.509 and PGP in terms of key hierarchies and
 19.7  key trust?
 19.8
 19.9  In PGP, what is the expected number of session keys generated before a previously
       created key is produced?
19.10
19.11  A PGP user may have multiple public keys. So that a recipient knows which public
19.12  key is being used by a sender, a key ID, consisting of the least significant 64 bits of the
       public key, is sent with the message. What is the probability that a user with N public
       keys will have at least one duplicate key ID?

       The first 16 bits of the message digest in a PGP signature are translated in the clear.
       This enables the recipient to determine if the correct public key was used to decrypt
       the message digest by comparing this plaintext copy of the first two octets with the
       first two octets of the decrypted digest.
       a. To what extent does this compromise the security of the hash algorithm?
       b. To what extent does it in fact perform its intended function, namely, to help deter-

           mine if the correct RSA key was used to decrypt the digest?

       Consider base64 conversion as a form of encryption. In this case, there is no key. But
       suppose that an opponent knew only that some form of substitution algorithm was
       being used to encrypt English text and did not guess that it was base64. How effective
       would this algorithm be against cryptanalysis?

       Encode the text "ciphertext" using the following techniques. Assume characters are
       stored in 8-bit ASCII with zero parity.
       a. base64
       b. Quoted-printable

       Use a 2 * 2 matrix to categorize the properties of the four certificate usage models in
       DANE.
                          CHAPTER

IP Security

          20.1 IP Security Overview
                          Applications of IPsec
                          Benefits of IPsec
                          Routing Applications
                          IPsec Documents
                          IPsec Services
                          Transport and Tunnel Modes

          20.2 IP Security Policy
                          Security Associations
                          Security Association Database
                          Security Policy Database
                          IP Traffic Processing

          20.3 Encapsulating Security Payload
                          ESP Format
                          Encryption and Authentication Algorithms
                          Padding
                          Anti-Replay Service
                          Transport and Tunnel Modes

          20.4 Combining Security Associations
                          Authentication Plus Confidentiality
                          Basic Combinations of Security Associations

          20.5 Internet Key Exchange
                          Key Determination Protocol
                          Header and Payload Formats

          20.6 Cryptographic Suites
          20.7 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems

                                                                                               661
662 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                              LEARNING OBJECTIVES

            After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

             Present an overview of IP security (IPsec).
             Explain the difference between transport mode and tunnel mode.
             Understand the concept of security association.
             Explain the difference between the security association database and the

                 security policy database.
             Summarize the traffic processing functions performed by IPsec for out-

                 bound packets and for inbound packets.
             Present an overview of Encapsulating Security Payload.
             Discuss the alternatives for combining security associations.
             Present an overview of Internet Key Exchange.
             Summarize the alternative cryptographic suites approved for use with IPsec.

          There are application-specific security mechanisms for a number of application
          areas, including electronic mail (S/MIME, PGP), client/server (Kerberos), Web ac-
          cess (Secure Sockets Layer), and others. However, users have security concerns that
          cut across protocol layers. For example, an enterprise can run a secure, private IP
          network by disallowing links to untrusted sites, encrypting packets that leave the
          premises, and authenticating packets that enter the premises. By implementing se-
          curity at the IP level, an organization can ensure secure networking not only for
          applications that have security mechanisms but also for the many security-ignorant
          applications.

                  IP-level security encompasses three functional areas: authentication, confiden-
          tiality, and key management. The authentication mechanism assures that a received
          packet was, in fact, transmitted by the party identified as the source in the packet
          header. In addition, this mechanism assures that the packet has not been altered in
          transit. The confidentiality facility enables communicating nodes to encrypt messages
          to prevent eavesdropping by third parties. The key management facility is concerned
          with the secure exchange of keys.

                  We begin this chapter with an overview of IP security (IPsec) and an introduc-
          tion to the IPsec architecture. We then look at each of the three functional areas in
          detail. Appendix L reviews Internet protocols.

  20.1 IP SECURITY OVERVIEW

          In 1994, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) issued a report titled "Security in
          the Internet Architecture" (RFC 1636). The report identified key areas for security
          mechanisms. Among these were the need to secure the network infrastructure from
                                                20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 663

unauthorized monitoring and control of network traffic and the need to secure end-
user-to-end-user traffic using authentication and encryption mechanisms.

       To provide security, the IAB included authentication and encryption as nec-
essary security features in the next-generation IP, which has been issued as IPv6.
Fortunately, these security capabilities were designed to be usable both with the
current IPv4 and the future IPv6. This means that vendors can begin offering these
features now, and many vendors now do have some IPsec capability in their prod-
ucts. The IPsec specification now exists as a set of Internet standards.

Applications of IPsec

IPsec provides the capability to secure communications across a LAN, across pri-
vate and public WANs, and across the Internet. Examples of its use include:

    Secure branch office connectivity over the Internet: A company can build a
       secure virtual private network over the Internet or over a public WAN. This
       enables a business to rely heavily on the Internet and reduce its need for pri-
       vate networks, saving costs and network management overhead.

    Secure remote access over the Internet: An end user whose system is equipped
       with IP security protocols can make a local call to an Internet Service Provider
       (ISP) and gain secure access to a company network. This reduces the cost of
       toll charges for traveling employees and telecommuters.

    Establishing extranet and intranet connectivity with partners: IPsec can be
       used to secure communication with other organizations, ensuring authentica-
       tion and confidentiality and providing a key exchange mechanism.

    Enhancing electronic commerce security: Even though some Web and elec-
       tronic commerce applications have built-in security protocols, the use of IPsec
       enhances that security. IPsec guarantees that all traffic designated by the net-
       work administrator is both encrypted and authenticated, adding an additional
       layer of security to whatever is provided at the application layer.

       The principal feature of IPsec that enables it to support these varied applica-
tions is that it can encrypt and/or authenticate all traffic at the IP level. Thus, all dis-
tributed applications (including remote logon, client/server, email, file transfer, Web
access, and so on) can be secured. Figure 20.1a shows a simplified packet format for
an IPsec option known as tunnel mode, described subsequently. Tunnel mode makes
use of an IPsec function, a combined authentication/encryption function called
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP), and a key exchange function. For VPNs,
both authentication and encryption are generally desired, because it is important
both to (1) assure that unauthorized users do not penetrate the VPN, and (2) assure
that eavesdroppers on the Internet cannot read messages sent over the VPN.

       Figure 20.1b is a typical scenario of IPsec usage. An organization maintains
LANs at dispersed locations. Nonsecure IP traffic is conducted on each LAN. For
traffic offsite, through some sort of private or public WAN, IPsec protocols are used.
These protocols operate in networking devices, such as a router or firewall, that
connect each LAN to the outside world. The IPsec networking device will typically
encrypt all traffic going into the WAN and decrypt traffic coming from the WAN;
these operations are transparent to workstations and servers on the LAN. Secure
664 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                              authenticated
                                   encrypted

         New IP ESP orig IP               IP payload                  ESP ESP
           hdr hdr hdr                                                trlr auth

                              (a) Tunnel-mode format                    Public (Internet)
                                                                            or private
                                                                             network

User system
with IPSec

                          Networking device
                          with IPSec

             Ethernet
              switch

Legend:      Unprotected      IP traffic  Virtual tunnel:
               IP traffic     protected      protected
                              by IPSec       by IPSec

                                           (b) Example configuration
Figure 20.1 An IPSec VPN Scenario

transmission is also possible with individual users who dial into the WAN. Such user
workstations must implement the IPsec protocols to provide security.

Benefits of IPsec

Some of the benefits of IPsec:

    When IPsec is implemented in a firewall or router, it provides strong security
       that can be applied to all traffic crossing the perimeter. Traffic within a com-
       pany or workgroup does not incur the overhead of security-related processing.
                                                20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 665

    IPsec in a firewall is resistant to bypass if all traffic from the outside must use
       IP and the firewall is the only means of entrance from the Internet into the
       organization.

    IPsec is below the transport layer (TCP, UDP) and so is transparent to appli-
       cations. There is no need to change software on a user or server system when
       IPsec is implemented in the firewall or router. Even if IPsec is implemented in
       end systems, upper-layer software, including applications, is not affected.

    IPsec can be transparent to end users. There is no need to train users on secu-
       rity mechanisms, issue keying material on a per-user basis, or revoke keying
       material when users leave the organization.

    IPsec can provide security for individual users if needed. This is useful for off-
       site workers and for setting up a secure virtual subnetwork within an organiza-
       tion for sensitive applications.

Routing Applications

In addition to supporting end users and protecting premises systems and networks,
IPsec can play a vital role in the routing architecture required for internetworking.
[HUIT98] lists the following examples of the use of IPsec. IPsec can assure that

    A router advertisement (a new router advertises its presence) comes from an
       authorized router.

    A neighbor advertisement (a router seeks to establish or maintain a neighbor
       relationship with a router in another routing domain) comes from an autho-
       rized router.

    A redirect message comes from the router to which the initial IP packet was sent.

    A routing update is not forged.

       Without such security measures, an opponent can disrupt communications
or divert some traffic. Routing protocols such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
should be run on top of security associations between routers that are defined by
IPsec.

IPsec Documents

IPsec encompasses three functional areas: authentication, confidentiality, and key
management. The totality of the IPsec specification is scattered across dozens of
RFCs and draft IETF documents, making this the most complex and difficult to
grasp of all IETF specifications. The best way to grasp the scope of IPsec is to
consult the latest version of the IPsec document roadmap, which as of this writ-
ing is RFC 6071 [IP Security (IPsec) and Internet Key Exchange (IKE) Document
Roadmap, February 2011]. The documents can be categorized into the following
groups.

    Architecture: Covers the general concepts, security requirements, definitions,
       and mechanisms defining IPsec technology. The current specification is RFC
       4301, Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.
666 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

              Authentication Header (AH): AH is an extension header to provide mes-
                  sage authentication.The current specification is RFC 4302, IP Authentication
                  Header. Because message authentication is provided by ESP, the use of
                  AH is deprecated. It is included in IPsecv3 for backward compatibility
                  but should not be used in new applications. We do not discuss AH in this
                  chapter.

              Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP): ESP consists of an encapsulat-
                  ing header and trailer used to provide encryption or combined encryption/
                  authentication. The current specification is RFC 4303, IP Encapsulating
                  Security Payload (ESP).

              Internet Key Exchange (IKE): This is a collection of documents describing
                  the key management schemes for use with IPsec. The main specification is
                  RFC 7296, Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol, but there are a number
                  of related RFCs.

              Cryptographic algorithms: This category encompasses a large set of docu-
                  ments that define and describe cryptographic algorithms for encryption, mes-
                  sage authentication, pseudorandom functions (PRFs), and cryptographic key
                  exchange.

              Other: There are a variety of other IPsec-related RFCs, including those deal-
                  ing with security policy and management information base (MIB) content.

         IPsec Services

          IPsec provides security services at the IP layer by enabling a system to select
          required security protocols, determine the algorithm(s) to use for the service(s),
          and put in place any cryptographic keys required to provide the requested services.
          Two protocols are used to provide security: an authentication protocol designated
          by the header of the protocol, Authentication Header (AH); and a combined
          encryption/authentication protocol designated by the format of the packet for
          that protocol, Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). RFC 4301 lists the following
          services:

              Access control
              Connectionless integrity
              Data origin authentication
              Rejection of replayed packets (a form of partial sequence integrity)
              Confidentiality (encryption)
              Limited traffic flow confidentiality

         Transport and Tunnel Modes

          Both AH and ESP support two modes of use: transport and tunnel mode. The oper-
          ation of these two modes is best understood in the context of a description of ESP,
          which is covered in Section 20.3. Here we provide a brief overview.
                                                                     20.1 / IP SECURITY OVERVIEW 667

                         TRANSPORT MODE Transport mode provides protection primarily for upper-layer
                         protocols. That is, transport mode protection extends to the payload of an IP
                         packet.1 Examples include a TCP or UDP segment or an ICMP packet, all of which
                         operate directly above IP in a host protocol stack. Typically, transport mode is used
                         for end-to-end communication between two hosts (e.g., a client and a server, or two
                         workstations). When a host runs AH or ESP over IPv4, the payload is the data that
                         normally follow the IP header. For IPv6, the payload is the data that normally fol-
                         low both the IP header and any IPv6 extensions headers that are present, with the
                         possible exception of the destination options header, which may be included in the
                         protection.

                                ESP in transport mode encrypts and optionally authenticates the IP payload
                         but not the IP header. AH in transport mode authenticates the IP payload and
                         selected portions of the IP header.

                         TUNNEL MODE Tunnel mode provides protection to the entire IP packet. To achieve
                         this, after the AH or ESP fields are added to the IP packet, the entire packet plus
                         security fields is treated as the payload of new outer IP packet with a new outer
                         IP header. The entire original, inner, packet travels through a tunnel from one
                         point of an IP network to another; no routers along the way are able to examine
                         the inner IP header. Because the original packet is encapsulated, the new, larger
                         packet may have totally different source and destination addresses, adding to the
                         security. Tunnel mode is used when one or both ends of a security association (SA)
                         are a security gateway, such as a firewall or router that implements IPsec. With tun-
                         nel mode, a number of hosts on networks behind firewalls may engage in secure
                         communications without implementing IPsec. The unprotected packets generated
                         by such hosts are tunneled through external networks by tunnel mode SAs set up
                         by the IPsec software in the firewall or secure router at the boundary of the local
                         network.

                                Here is an example of how tunnel mode IPsec operates. Host A on a network
                         generates an IP packet with the destination address of host B on another network.
                         This packet is routed from the originating host to a firewall or secure router at the
                         boundary of A's network. The firewall filters all outgoing packets to determine the
                         need for IPsec processing. If this packet from A to B requires IPsec, the firewall
                         performs IPsec processing and encapsulates the packet with an outer IP header.
                         The source IP address of this outer IP packet is this firewall, and the destination
                         address may be a firewall that forms the boundary to B's local network. This packet
                         is now routed to B's firewall, with intermediate routers examining only the outer IP
                         header. At B's firewall, the outer IP header is stripped off, and the inner packet is
                         delivered to B.

                                ESP in tunnel mode encrypts and optionally authenticates the entire inner IP
                         packet, including the inner IP header. AH in tunnel mode authenticates the entire
                         inner IP packet and selected portions of the outer IP header.

                                Table 20.1 summarizes transport and tunnel mode functionality.

                               1In this chapter, the term IP packet refers to either an IPv4 datagram or an IPv6 packet.

Hiva-Network.Com
668 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

Table 20.1 Tunnel Mode and Transport Mode Functionality

                Transport Mode SA                                      Tunnel Mode SA
                                                       Authenticates entire inner IP packet (inner
AH              Authenticates IP payload and selected  header plus IP payload) plus selected portions
                                                       of outer IP header and outer IPv6 extension
                portions of IP header and IPv6         headers.
                                                       Encrypts entire inner IP packet.
                extension headers.
                                                       Encrypts entire inner IP packet. Authenticates
ESP             Encrypts IP payload and any IPv6       inner IP packet.
                extension headers following the ESP
ESP with        header.
Authentication
                Encrypts IP payload and any IPv6
                extension headers following the ESP
                header. Authenticates IP payload but
                not IP header.

20.2 IP SECURITY POLICY

        Fundamental to the operation of IPsec is the concept of a security policy applied
        to each IP packet that transits from a source to a destination. IPsec policy is
        determined primarily by the interaction of two databases, the security association
        database (SAD) and the security policy database (SPD). This section provides an
        overview of these two databases and then summarizes their use during IPsec opera-
        tion. Figure 20.2 illustrates the relevant relationships.

      Security Associations

        A key concept that appears in both the authentication and confidentiality mecha-
        nisms for IP is the security association (SA). An association is a one-way logical
        connection between a sender and a receiver that affords security services to the traf-
        fic carried on it. If a peer relationship is needed for two-way secure exchange, then
        two security associations are required.

               A security association is uniquely identified by three parameters.

            Security Parameters Index (SPI): A 32-bit unsigned integer assigned to this
               SA and having local significance only. The SPI is carried in AH and ESP head-
               ers to enable the receiving system to select the SA under which a received
               packet will be processed.

            IP Destination Address: This is the address of the destination endpoint of the
               SA, which may be an end-user system or a network system such as a firewall
               or router.

            Security Protocol Identifier: This field from the outer IP header indicates
               whether the association is an AH or ESP security association.

               Hence, in any IP packet, the security association is uniquely identified by the
        Destination Address in the IPv4 or IPv6 header and the SPI in the enclosed exten-
        sion header (AH or ESP).
                                                  20.2 / IP SECURITY POLICY 669

SPD       IKEv2                Key exchange         IKEv2           SPD
           IPsecv3                IKE SA          IPsecv3
Security                                                           Security
 policy                        IPsec SA Pair                        policy
database                                                           database

                     Security  ESP protects data   Security

          SAD association                         association SAD

                     database                      database

Figure 20.2 IPsec Architecture

    Security Association Database

     In each IPsec implementation, there is a nominal2 Security Association Database
     that defines the parameters associated with each SA. A security association is nor-
     mally defined by the following parameters in an SAD entry.

         Security Parameter Index: A 32-bit value selected by the receiving end of an
            SA to uniquely identify the SA. In an SAD entry for an outbound SA, the SPI
            is used to construct the packet's AH or ESP header. In an SAD entry for an
            inbound SA, the SPI is used to map traffic to the appropriate SA.

         Sequence Number Counter: A 32-bit value used to generate the Sequence
            Number field in AH or ESP headers, described in Section 20.3 (required for all
            implementations).

         Sequence Counter Overflow: A flag indicating whether overflow of the
            Sequence Number Counter should generate an auditable event and prevent
            further transmission of packets on this SA (required for all implementations).

         Anti-Replay Window: Used to determine whether an inbound AH or ESP
            packet is a replay, described in Section 20.3 (required for all implementations).

         AH Information: Authentication algorithm, keys, key lifetimes, and related
            parameters being used with AH (required for AH implementations).

         ESP Information: Encryption and authentication algorithm, keys, initialization
            values, key lifetimes, and related parameters being used with ESP (required
            for ESP implementations).

         Lifetime of this Security Association: A time interval or byte count after
            which an SA must be replaced with a new SA (and new SPI) or terminated,
            plus an indication of which of these actions should occur (required for all
            implementations).

      2Nominal in the sense that the functionality provided by a Security Association Database must be present
      in any IPsec implementation, but the way in which that functionality is provided is up to the implementer.
670 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

              IPsec Protocol Mode: Tunnel, transport, or wildcard.

              Path MTU: Any observed path maximum transmission unit (maximum size of
                  a packet that can be transmitted without fragmentation) and aging variables
                  (required for all implementations).

                  The key management mechanism that is used to distribute keys is coupled to
          the authentication and privacy mechanisms only by way of the Security Parameters
          Index (SPI). Hence, authentication and privacy have been specified independent of
          any specific key management mechanism.

                  IPsec provides the user with considerable flexibility in the way in which IPsec
          services are applied to IP traffic. As we will see later, SAs can be combined in a
          number of ways to yield the desired user configuration. Furthermore, IPsec pro-
          vides a high degree of granularity in discriminating between traffic that is afforded
          IPsec protection and traffic that is allowed to bypass IPsec, as in the former case
          relating IP traffic to specific SAs.

         Security Policy Database

          The means by which IP traffic is related to specific SAs (or no SA in the case of traffic
          allowed to bypass IPsec) is the nominal Security Policy Database (SPD). In its simplest
          form, an SPD contains entries, each of which defines a subset of IP traffic and points
          to an SA for that traffic. In more complex environments, there may be multiple entries
          that potentially relate to a single SA or multiple SAs associated with a single SPD
          entry. The reader is referred to the relevant IPsec documents for a full discussion.

                  Each SPD entry is defined by a set of IP and upper-layer protocol field values,
          called selectors. In effect, these selectors are used to filter outgoing traffic in order
          to map it into a particular SA. Outbound processing obeys the following general
          sequence for each IP packet.

              1. Compare the values of the appropriate fields in the packet (the selector fields)
                  against the SPD to find a matching SPD entry, which will point to zero or more SAs.

              2. Determine the SA if any for this packet and its associated SPI.

              3. Do the required IPsec processing (i.e., AH or ESP processing).

                  The following selectors determine an SPD entry:

              Remote IP Address: This may be a single IP address, an enumerated list or
                  range of addresses, or a wildcard (mask) address. The latter two are required to
                  support more than one destination system sharing the same SA (e.g., behind
                  a firewall).

              Local IP Address: This may be a single IP address, an enumerated list or range
                  of addresses, or a wildcard (mask) address. The latter two are required to sup-
                  port more than one source system sharing the same SA (e.g., behind a firewall).

              Next Layer Protocol: The IP protocol header (IPv4, IPv6, or IPv6 Extension)
                  includes a field (Protocol for IPv4, Next Header for IPv6 or IPv6 Extension)
                  that designates the protocol operating over IP. This is an individual protocol
                  number, ANY, or for IPv6 only, OPAQUE. If AH or ESP is used, then this IP
                  protocol header immediately precedes the AH or ESP header in the packet.
                                               20.2 / IP SECURITY POLICY 671

Table 20.2 Host SPD Example

Protocol  Local IP   Port    Remote IP   Port        Action                Comment
UDP       1.2.3.101  500     *           500                     IKE
ICMP      1.2.3.101  *       *           *     BYPASS            Error messages
*         1.2.3.101  *       1.2.3.0/24  *     BYPASS            Encrypt intranet traffic
                                               PROTECT: ESP
TCP       1.2.3.101 *        1.2.4.10    80    intransport-mode  Encrypt to server
                                               PROTECT: ESP
TCP       1.2.3.101 *        1.2.4.10    443   intransport-mode  TLS: avoid double encryption
*         1.2.3.101 *        1.2.4.0/24  *     BYPASS            Others in DMZ
*         1.2.3.101 *        *           *     DISCARD           Internet
                                               BYPASS

         Name: A user identifier from the operating system. This is not a field in the IP
            or upper-layer headers but is available if IPsec is running on the same operat-
            ing system as the user.

         Local and Remote Ports: These may be individual TCP or UDP port values, an
            enumerated list of ports, or a wildcard port.

            Table 20.2 provides an example of an SPD on a host system (as opposed to
     a network system such as a firewall or router). This table reflects the following
     configuration: A local network configuration consists of two networks. The basic
     corporate network configuration has the IP network number 1.2.3.0/24. The local
     configuration also includes a secure LAN, often known as a DMZ, that is identified
     as 1.2.4.0/24. The DMZ is protected from both the outside world and the rest of the
     corporate LAN by firewalls. The host in this example has the IP address 1.2.3.10,
     and it is authorized to connect to the server 1.2.4.10 in the DMZ.

            The entries in the SPD should be self-explanatory. For example, UDP port
     500 is the designated port for IKE. Any traffic from the local host to a remote host
     for purposes of an IKE exchange bypasses the IPsec processing.

     IP Traffic Processing

     IPsec is executed on a packet-by-packet basis. When IPsec is implemented, each
     outbound IP packet is processed by the IPsec logic before transmission, and each
     inbound packet is processed by the IPsec logic after reception and before passing
     the packet contents on to the next higher layer (e.g., TCP or UDP). We look at the
     logic of these two situations in turn.

     OUTBOUND PACKETS Figure 20.3 highlights the main elements of IPsec processing
     for outbound traffic. A block of data from a higher layer, such as TCP, is passed
     down to the IP layer and an IP packet is formed, consisting of an IP header and an
     IP body. Then the following steps occur:

        1. IPsec searches the SPD for a match to this packet.
        2. If no match is found, then the packet is discarded and an error message is generated.
672 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                                                      Outbound IP packet
                                                   (e.g., from TCP or UDP)

No match      Search
  found   security policy

             database

          Match found

Discard DISCARD Determine  PROTECT

packet    policy

          BYPASS                                                                      No match

                           Match                                            Search                found
                           found
                                                                            security association

                                                                            database

                            Process                                                               Internet
                           (AH/ESP)                                                                  key

                                                                                                  exchange

                                                         Forward
                                                        packet via

                                                             IP

             Figure 20.3 Processing Model for Outbound Packets

   3. If a match is found, further processing is determined by the first matching
       entry in the SPD. If the policy for this packet is DISCARD, then the packet is
       discarded. If the policy is BYPASS, then there is no further IPsec processing;
       the packet is forwarded to the network for transmission.

   4. If the policy is PROTECT, then a search is made of the SAD for a matching
       entry. If no entry is found, then IKE is invoked to create an SA with the ap-
       propriate keys and an entry is made in the SA.

   5. The matching entry in the SAD determines the processing for this packet.
       Either encryption, authentication, or both can be performed, and either trans-
       port or tunnel mode can be used. The packet is then forwarded to the network
       for transmission.

INBOUND PACKETS Figure 20.4 highlights the main elements of IPsec processing for
inbound traffic. An incoming IP packet triggers the IPsec processing. The following
steps occur:

   1. IPsec determines whether this is an unsecured IP packet or one that has ESP
       or AH headers/trailers, by examining the IP Protocol field (IPv4) or Next
       Header field (IPv6).
                 20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 673

                         Deliver packet
                         to higher layer
                       (e.g., TCP, UDP)

                                          Process
                                         (AH/ESP)

                                                      Match

BYPASS           Not           No match               found

Search BYPASS         Discard  found     Search
                      packet
security policy                       security association

database                                 database

          IP          Packet   IPsec

                      type

                                  Inbound IP packet
                                     (from Internet)

Figure 20.4 Processing Model for Inbound Packets

           2. If the packet is unsecured, IPsec searches the SPD for a match to this packet.
               If the first matching entry has a policy of BYPASS, the IP header is processed
               and stripped off and the packet body is delivered to the next higher layer, such
               as TCP. If the first matching entry has a policy of PROTECT or DISCARD, or
               if there is no matching entry, the packet is discarded.

           3. For a secured packet, IPsec searches the SAD. If no match is found, the packet
               is discarded. Otherwise, IPsec applies the appropriate ESP or AH processing.
               Then, the IP header is processed and stripped off and the packet body is deliv-
               ered to the next higher layer, such as TCP.

20.3 ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD

        ESP can be used to provide confidentiality, data origin authentication, connection-
        less integrity, an anti-replay service (a form of partial sequence integrity), and (lim-
        ited) traffic flow confidentiality. The set of services provided depends on options
        selected at the time of Security Association (SA) establishment and on the location
        of the implementation in a network topology.

               ESP can work with a variety of encryption and authentication algorithms, in-
        cluding authenticated encryption algorithms such as GCM.
674 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                                                                                32 bits
                                                               Security parameters index (SPI)

                                                                        Sequence number

Encrypted           Payload data (variable)
      ICV coverage
                                  Padding (0­255 bytes)
                                                           Pad length                           Next header

                        Integrity check value - ICV (variable)

                    (a) Top-level format of an ESP Packet

                    Security parameters index (SPI)
                             Sequence number

                    Initialization value - IV (optional)

Encrypted           Rest of payload data (variable)                                                          Payload
      ICV coverage
                      TFC padding (optional, variable)
                                          Padding (0­255 bytes)                                 Next header
                                                      Pad length

                    Integrity check value - ICV (variable)

                                     (b) Substructure of payload data
Figure 20.5 ESP Packet Format

ESP Format

Figure 20.5a shows the top-level format of an ESP packet. It contains the following fields.

    Security Parameters Index (32 bits): Identifies a security association.
    Sequence Number (32 bits): A monotonically increasing counter value; this

       provides an anti-replay function, as discussed for AH.
    Payload Data (variable): This is a transport-level segment (transport mode) or

       IP packet (tunnel mode) that is protected by encryption.
    Padding (0­255 bytes): The purpose of this field is discussed later.
    Pad Length (8 bits): Indicates the number of pad bytes immediately preceding

       this field.
    Next Header (8 bits): Identifies the type of data contained in the payload data

       field by identifying the first header in that payload (e.g., an extension header
       in IPv6, or an upper-layer protocol such as TCP).
    Integrity Check Value (variable): A variable-length field (must be an integral
       number of 32-bit words) that contains the Integrity Check Value computed
       over the ESP packet minus the Authentication Data field.
                                 20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 675

       When any combined mode algorithm is employed, the algorithm itself is ex-
pected to return both decrypted plaintext and a pass/fail indication for the integrity
check. For combined mode algorithms, the ICV that would normally appear at the
end of the ESP packet (when integrity is selected) may be omitted. When the ICV
is omitted and integrity is selected, it is the responsibility of the combined mode
algorithm to encode within the Payload Data an ICV-equivalent means of verifying
the integrity of the packet.

       Two additional fields may be present in the payload (Figure 20.5b).
An initialization value (IV), or nonce, is present if this is required by the encryption
or authenticated encryption algorithm used for ESP. If tunnel mode is being used,
then the IPsec implementation may add traffic flow confidentiality (TFC) padding
after the Payload Data and before the Padding field, as explained subsequently.

Encryption and Authentication Algorithms

The Payload Data, Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields are encrypted by
the ESP service. If the algorithm used to encrypt the payload requires cryptographic
synchronization data, such as an initialization vector (IV), then these data may be
carried explicitly at the beginning of the Payload Data field. If included, an IV is
usually not encrypted, although it is often referred to as being part of the ciphertext.

       The ICV field is optional. It is present only if the integrity service is selected
and is provided by either a separate integrity algorithm or a combined mode algo-
rithm that uses an ICV. The ICV is computed after the encryption is performed.
This order of processing facilitates rapid detection and rejection of replayed or
bogus packets by the receiver prior to decrypting the packet, hence potentially re-
ducing the impact of denial of service (DoS) attacks. It also allows for the possibility
of parallel processing of packets at the receiver that is decryption can take place in
parallel with integrity checking. Note that because the ICV is not protected by en-
cryption, a keyed integrity algorithm must be employed to compute the ICV.

Padding

The Padding field serves several purposes:

    If an encryption algorithm requires the plaintext to be a multiple of some
       number of bytes (e.g., the multiple of a single block for a block cipher), the
       Padding field is used to expand the plaintext (consisting of the Payload Data,
       Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields) to the required length.

    The ESP format requires that the Pad Length and Next Header fields be right
       aligned within a 32-bit word. Equivalently, the ciphertext must be an integer
       multiple of 32 bits. The Padding field is used to assure this alignment.

    Additional padding may be added to provide partial traffic-flow confidential-
       ity by concealing the actual length of the payload.

Anti-Replay Service

A replay attack is one in which an attacker obtains a copy of an authenticated
packet and later transmits it to the intended destination. The receipt of duplicate,
authenticated IP packets may disrupt service in some way or may have some other
676 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

          undesired consequence. The Sequence Number field is designed to thwart such at-
          tacks. First, we discuss sequence number generation by the sender, and then we
          look at how it is processed by the recipient.

                  When a new SA is established, the sender initializes a sequence number
          counter to 0. Each time that a packet is sent on this SA, the sender increments the
          counter and places the value in the Sequence Number field. Thus, the first value to
          be used is 1. If anti-replay is enabled (the default), the sender must not allow the
          sequence number to cycle past 232 - 1 back to zero. Otherwise, there would be mul-
          tiple valid packets with the same sequence number. If the limit of 232 - 1 is reached,
          the sender should terminate this SA and negotiate a new SA with a new key.

                  Because IP is a connectionless, unreliable service, the protocol does not guar-
          antee that packets will be delivered in order and does not guarantee that all packets
          will be delivered. Therefore, the IPsec authentication document dictates that the
          receiver should implement a window of size W, with a default of W = 64. The right
          edge of the window represents the highest sequence number, N, so far received for a
          valid packet. For any packet with a sequence number in the range from N - W + 1
          to N that has been correctly received (i.e., properly authenticated), the correspond-
          ing slot in the window is marked (Figure 20.6). Inbound processing proceeds as fol-
          lows when a packet is received:

              1. If the received packet falls within the window and is new, the MAC is checked.
                  If the packet is authenticated, the corresponding slot in the window is marked.

              2. If the received packet is to the right of the window and is new, the MAC is
                  checked. If the packet is authenticated, the window is advanced so that this
                  sequence number is the right edge of the window, and the corresponding slot
                  in the window is marked.

              3. If the received packet is to the left of the window or if authentication fails, the
                  packet is discarded; this is an auditable event.

         Transport and Tunnel Modes

          Figure 20.7 shows two ways in which the IPsec ESP service can be used. In the upper
          part of the figure, encryption (and optionally authentication) is provided directly be-
          tween two hosts. Figure 20.7b shows how tunnel mode operation can be used to set up

                                                                                Advance window if
                                                                                 valid packet to the

                                                                                   right is received

                                                                   Fixed window size W

                                                                                                                  N

                                                         N­W                                                              N+1
                                                                Marked if valid                     Unmarked if valid
                                                                 packet received                  packet not yet received

                               Figure 20.6 Anti-replay Mechanism

Hiva-Network.Com
                     20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 677

              Encrypted                            External
            TCP Session                            Network

Internal
Network

                     (a) Transport-level security

          Corporate                                Corporate
           network                                  network

Encrypted tunnels    Internet
carrying IP traffic

Corporate                                          Corporate
 network                                            network

                       (b) A virtual private network via tunnel mode
Figure 20.7 Transport-Mode versus Tunnel-Mode Encryptionx

a virtual private network. In this example, an organization has four private networks
interconnected across the Internet. Hosts on the internal networks use the Internet
for transport of data but do not interact with other Internet-based hosts. By terminat-
ing the tunnels at the security gateway to each internal network, the configuration al-
lows the hosts to avoid implementing the security capability. The former technique is
supported by a transport mode SA, while the latter technique uses a tunnel mode SA.

       In this section, we look at the scope of ESP for the two modes. The consid-
erations are somewhat different for IPv4 and IPv6. We use the packet formats of
Figure 20.8a as a starting point.

TRANSPORT MODE ESP Transport mode ESP is used to encrypt and optionally au-
thenticate the data carried by IP (e.g., a TCP segment), as shown in Figure 20.8b.
For this mode using IPv4, the ESP header is inserted into the IP packet immedi-
ately prior to the transport-layer header (e.g., TCP, UDP, ICMP), and an ESP
trailer (Padding, Pad Length, and Next Header fields) is placed after the IP packet.
If authentication is selected, the ESP Authentication Data field is added after the
ESP trailer. The entire transport-level segment plus the ESP trailer are encrypted.
Authentication covers all of the ciphertext plus the ESP header.

       In the context of IPv6, ESP is viewed as an end-to-end payload; that is, it is
not examined or processed by intermediate routers. Therefore, the ESP header ap-
pears after the IPv6 base header and the hop-by-hop, routing, and fragment exten-
sion headers. The destination options extension header could appear before or after
the ESP header, depending on the semantics desired. For IPv6, encryption covers
678 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                                    IPv4  Orig IP  TCP                       Data

                                          hdr

            IPv6  Orig IP Extension headers        TCP                       Data

                  hdr               (if present)

                                    (a) Before Applying ESP

                                                        authenticated
                                                                 encrypted

                              IPv4  Orig IP ESP TCP                          Data  ESP ESP
                                      hdr hdr                                      trlr auth

                                                   authenticated
                                                            encrypted

      IPv6  Orig IP Hop-by-hop, dest, ESP Dest TCP                           Data  ESP ESP
              hdr routing, fragment hdr                                            trlr auth

                                    (b) Transport Mode                             ESP ESP
                                                                                   trlr auth
                                                   authenticated
                                                        encrypted

            IPv4              New IP ESP Orig IP   TCP                       Data

                              hdr hdr hdr

                                          authenticated
                                                   encrypted

IPv6  New IP Ext ESP Orig IP Ext                   TCP                       Data  ESP ESP
                                                                                   trlr auth
      hdr   headers hdr hdr headers

                                                            (c) Tunnel Mode
Figure 20.8 Scope of ESP Encryption and Authentication

the entire transport-level segment plus the ESP trailer plus the destination options
extension header if it occurs after the ESP header. Again, authentication covers the
ciphertext plus the ESP header.

       Transport mode operation may be summarized as follows.

   1. At the source, the block of data consisting of the ESP trailer plus the entire
       transport-layer segment is encrypted and the plaintext of this block is replaced
                                 20.3 / ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD 679

       with its ciphertext to form the IP packet for transmission. Authentication is
       added if this option is selected.

   2. The packet is then routed to the destination. Each intermediate router needs
       to examine and process the IP header plus any plaintext IP extension headers
       but does not need to examine the ciphertext.

   3. The destination node examines and processes the IP header plus any plaintext
       IP extension headers. Then, on the basis of the SPI in the ESP header, the
       destination node decrypts the remainder of the packet to recover the plaintext
       transport-layer segment.

       Transport mode operation provides confidentiality for any application that
uses it, thus avoiding the need to implement confidentiality in every individual ap-
plication. One drawback to this mode is that it is possible to do traffic analysis on
the transmitted packets.

TUNNEL MODE ESP Tunnel mode ESP is used to encrypt an entire IP packet (Figure
20.8c). For this mode, the ESP header is prefixed to the packet and then the packet
plus the ESP trailer is encrypted. This method can be used to counter traffic analysis.

       Because the IP header contains the destination address and possibly source
routing directives and hop-by-hop option information, it is not possible simply to
transmit the encrypted IP packet prefixed by the ESP header. Intermediate routers
would be unable to process such a packet. Therefore, it is necessary to encapsulate
the entire block (ESP header plus ciphertext plus Authentication Data, if present)
with a new IP header that will contain sufficient information for routing but not for
traffic analysis.

       Whereas the transport mode is suitable for protecting connections between
hosts that support the ESP feature, the tunnel mode is useful in a configuration that
includes a firewall or other sort of security gateway that protects a trusted network
from external networks. In this latter case, encryption occurs only between an exter-
nal host and the security gateway or between two security gateways. This relieves
hosts on the internal network of the processing burden of encryption and simplifies
the key distribution task by reducing the number of needed keys. Further, it thwarts
traffic analysis based on ultimate destination.

       Consider a case in which an external host wishes to communicate with a host
on an internal network protected by a firewall, and in which ESP is implemented
in the external host and the firewalls. The following steps occur for transfer of a
transport-layer segment from the external host to the internal host.

   1. The source prepares an inner IP packet with a destination address of the target
       internal host. This packet is prefixed by an ESP header; then the packet and
       ESP trailer are encrypted and Authentication Data may be added. The result-
       ing block is encapsulated with a new IP header (base header plus optional ex-
       tensions such as routing and hop-by-hop options for IPv6) whose destination
       address is the firewall; this forms the outer IP packet.

   2. The outer packet is routed to the destination firewall. Each intermediate
       router needs to examine and process the outer IP header plus any outer IP
       extension headers but does not need to examine the ciphertext.
680 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

              3. The destination firewall examines and processes the outer IP header plus any
                  outer IP extension headers. Then, on the basis of the SPI in the ESP header, the
                  destination node decrypts the remainder of the packet to recover the plaintext
                  inner IP packet. This packet is then transmitted in the internal network.

              4. The inner packet is routed through zero or more routers in the internal net-
                  work to the destination host.

                  Figure 20.9 shows the protocol architecture for the two modes.

Application                                                          Data
    TCP
      IP                  TCP                                        Data
    IPsec                  hdr

             Orig IP TCP                                             Data

             hdr          hdr

             Orig IP ESP TCP                                         Data  ESP ESP
               hdr hdr hdr                                                 trlr auth

               (a) Transport mode

Application                                                          Data

TCP                       TCP                                        Data
                           hdr

IP           Orig IP TCP                                             Data

             hdr          hdr

IPsec        ESP Orig IP TCP                                         Data  ESP ESP
                                                                           trlr auth
             hdr hdr      hdr

IP           New IP ESP Orig IP TCP                                  Data  ESP ESP
                                                                           trlr auth
             hdr hdr hdr  hdr

                                                    (b) Tunnel mode
Figure 20.9 Protocol Operation for ESP
                                       20.4 / COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS 681

20.4 COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS

        An individual SA can implement either the AH or ESP protocol but not both.
        Sometimes a particular traffic flow will call for the services provided by both AH
        and ESP. Further, a particular traffic flow may require IPsec services between hosts
        and, for that same flow, separate services between security gateways, such as fire-
        walls. In all of these cases, multiple SAs must be employed for the same traffic flow
        to achieve the desired IPsec services. The term security association bundle refers to
        a sequence of SAs through which traffic must be processed to provide a desired set
        of IPsec services. The SAs in a bundle may terminate at different endpoints or at
        the same endpoints.

               Security associations may be combined into bundles in two ways:

            Transport adjacency: Refers to applying more than one security protocol to
               the same IP packet without invoking tunneling. This approach to combining
               AH and ESP allows for only one level of combination; further nesting yields
               no added benefit since the processing is performed at one IPsec instance: the
               (ultimate) destination.

            Iterated tunneling: Refers to the application of multiple layers of security pro-
               tocols effected through IP tunneling. This approach allows for multiple levels
               of nesting, since each tunnel can originate or terminate at a different IPsec site
               along the path.

        The two approaches can be combined, for example, by having a transport SA be-
        tween hosts travel part of the way through a tunnel SA between security gateways.

               One interesting issue that arises when considering SA bundles is the order in
        which authentication and encryption may be applied between a given pair of end-
        points and the ways of doing so. We examine that issue next. Then we look at com-
        binations of SAs that involve at least one tunnel.

      Authentication Plus Confidentiality

        Encryption and authentication can be combined in order to transmit an IP packet
        that has both confidentiality and authentication between hosts. We look at several
        approaches.

        ESP WITH AUTHENTICATION OPTION This approach is illustrated in Figure 20.8.
        In this approach, the user first applies ESP to the data to be protected and then
        appends the authentication data field. There are actually two subcases:

            Transport mode ESP: Authentication and encryption apply to the IP payload
               delivered to the host, but the IP header is not protected.

            Tunnel mode ESP: Authentication applies to the entire IP packet delivered
               to the outer IP destination address (e.g., a firewall), and authentication is per-
               formed at that destination. The entire inner IP packet is protected by the pri-
               vacy mechanism for delivery to the inner IP destination.

        For both cases, authentication applies to the ciphertext rather than the plaintext.
682 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

          TRANSPORT ADJACENCY Another way to apply authentication after encryption is to
          use two bundled transport SAs, with the inner being an ESP SA and the outer being
          an AH SA. In this case, ESP is used without its authentication option. Because the
          inner SA is a transport SA, encryption is applied to the IP payload. The resulting
          packet consists of an IP header (and possibly IPv6 header extensions) followed by
          an ESP. AH is then applied in transport mode, so that authentication covers the
          ESP plus the original IP header (and extensions) except for mutable fields. The
          advantage of this approach over simply using a single ESP SA with the ESP authen-
          tication option is that the authentication covers more fields, including the source
          and destination IP addresses. The disadvantage is the overhead of two SAs versus
          one SA.

          TRANSPORT-TUNNEL BUNDLE The use of authentication prior to encryption might
          be preferable for several reasons. First, because the authentication data are pro-
          tected by encryption, it is impossible for anyone to intercept the message and alter
          the authentication data without detection. Second, it may be desirable to store the
          authentication information with the message at the destination for later reference.
          It is more convenient to do this if the authentication information applies to the un-
          encrypted message; otherwise the message would have to be reencrypted to verify
          the authentication information.

                  One approach to applying authentication before encryption between two hosts
          is to use a bundle consisting of an inner AH transport SA and an outer ESP tunnel
          SA. In this case, authentication is applied to the IP payload plus the IP header (and
          extensions) except for mutable fields. The resulting IP packet is then processed in
          tunnel mode by ESP; the result is that the entire, authenticated inner packet is en-
          crypted and a new outer IP header (and extensions) is added.

         Basic Combinations of Security Associations

          The IPsec Architecture document lists four examples of combinations of SAs that
          must be supported by compliant IPsec hosts (e.g., workstation, server) or security
          gateways (e.g., firewall, router). These are illustrated in Figure 20.10. The lower
          part of each case in the figure represents the physical connectivity of the elements;
          the upper part represents logical connectivity via one or more nested SAs. Each SA
          can be either AH or ESP. For host-to-host SAs, the mode may be either transport
          or tunnel; otherwise it must be tunnel mode.

                  Case 1. All security is provided between end systems that implement IPsec.
          For any two end systems to communicate via an SA, they must share the appropri-
          ate secret keys. Among the possible combinations are

              a. AH in transport mode

              b. ESP in transport mode

              c. ESP followed by AH in transport mode (an ESP SA inside an AH SA)

              d. Any one of a, b, or c inside an AH or ESP in tunnel mode

                  We have already discussed how these various combinations can be used to
          support authentication, encryption, authentication before encryption, and authenti-
          cation after encryption.
                 One or More SAs                                     Tunnel SA                One or Two SAs

                 Router            Router                             Security                 Security
                                                                     Gateway*                 Gateway*
                      Internet
Host*                                         Host* Host*                 Internet                       Host*
                       (a) Case 1
         Local                      Local                   Local          (c) Case 3          Local
       Intranet                    Intranet                Intranet                           Intranet
                                                                        Tunnel SA
                                                                                              One or Two SAs    20.4 / COMBINING SECURITY ASSOCIATIONS 683
                 Tunnel SA

                  Security          Security                                                  Security
                 Gateway*          Gateway*                                                   Gateway*

Host                 Internet                 Host                   Host*                               Host*

        Local                       Local                                      Internet        Local
      Intranet                     Intranet                                                   Intranet
                                                                                  (d) Case 4
                                          (b) Case 2

* = implements IPsec

Figure 20.10 Basic Combinations of Security Associations
684 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                  Case 2. Security is provided only between gateways (routers, firewalls, etc.)
          and no hosts implement IPsec. This case illustrates simple virtual private network
          support. The security architecture document specifies that only a single tunnel SA is
          needed for this case. The tunnel could support AH, ESP, or ESP with the authenti-
          cation option. Nested tunnels are not required, because the IPsec services apply to
          the entire inner packet.

                  Case 3. This builds on case 2 by adding end-to-end security. The same combi-
          nations discussed for cases 1 and 2 are allowed here. The gateway-to-gateway tun-
          nel provides either authentication, confidentiality, or both for all traffic between
          end systems. When the gateway-to-gateway tunnel is ESP, it also provides a limited
          form of traffic confidentiality. Individual hosts can implement any additional IPsec
          services required for given applications or given users by means of end-to-end SAs.

                  Case 4. This provides support for a remote host that uses the Internet to reach
          an organization's firewall and then to gain access to some server or workstation
          behind the firewall. Only tunnel mode is required between the remote host and the
          firewall. As in case 1, one or two SAs may be used between the remote host and the
          local host.

  20.5 INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE

          The key management portion of IPsec involves the determination and distribution
          of secret keys. A typical requirement is four keys for communication between two
          applications: transmit and receive pairs for both integrity and confidentiality. The
          IPsec Architecture document mandates support for two types of key management:

              Manual: A system administrator manually configures each system with its own
                  keys and with the keys of other communicating systems. This is practical for
                  small, relatively static environments.

              Automated: An automated system enables the on-demand creation of keys for
                  SAs and facilitates the use of keys in a large distributed system with an evolv-
                  ing configuration.

                  The default automated key management protocol for IPsec is referred to as
          ISAKMP/Oakley and consists of the following elements:

              Oakley Key Determination Protocol: Oakley is a key exchange protocol based
                  on the Diffie­Hellman algorithm but providing added security. Oakley is ge-
                  neric in that it does not dictate specific formats.

              Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP):
                  ISAKMP provides a framework for Internet key management and provides
                  the specific protocol support, including formats, for negotiation of security
                  attributes.

                  ISAKMP by itself does not dictate a specific key exchange algorithm; rather,
          ISAKMP consists of a set of message types that enable the use of a variety of key
          exchange algorithms. Oakley is the specific key exchange algorithm mandated for
          use with the initial version of ISAKMP.
                                                                  20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 685

                                In IKEv2, the terms Oakley and ISAKMP are no longer used, and there
                         are significant differences from the use of Oakley and ISAKMP in IKEv1.
                         Nevertheless, the basic functionality is the same. In this section, we describe the
                         IKEv2 specification.

                    Key Determination Protocol

                         IKE key determination is a refinement of the Diffie­Hellman key exchange algo-
                         rithm. Recall that Diffie­Hellman involves the following interaction between users
                         A and B. There is prior agreement on two global parameters: q, a large prime num-
                         ber; and a, a primitive root of q. A selects a random integer XA as its private key and
                         transmits to B its public key A = aXA mod q. Similarly, B selects a random integer
                         XB as its private key and transmits to A its public key B = aXB mod q. Each side
                         can now compute the secret session key:

                                             K = (B)XA mod q = (A)XB mod q = aXAXB mod q

                                The Diffie­Hellman algorithm has two attractive features:

                             Secret keys are created only when needed. There is no need to store secret
                                keys for a long period of time, exposing them to increased vulnerability.

                             The exchange requires no pre-existing infrastructure other than an agreement
                                on the global parameters.

                         However, there are a number of weaknesses to Diffie­Hellman, as pointed out in
                         [HUIT98].

                             It does not provide any information about the identities of the parties.
                             It is subject to a man-in-the-middle attack, in which a third party C imperson-

                                ates B while communicating with A and impersonates A while communicating
                                with B. Both A and B end up negotiating a key with C, which can then listen to
                                and pass on traffic. The man-in-the-middle attack proceeds as
                                1. B sends his public key YB in a message addressed to A (see Figure 10.2).
                                2. The enemy (E) intercepts this message. E saves B's public key and sends a

                                   message to A that has B's User ID but E's public key YE. This message is
                                    sent in such a way that it appears as though it was sent from B's host system.
                                    A receives E's message and stores E's public key with B's User ID. Similarly,
                                    E sends a message to B with E's public key, purporting to come from A.
                                3. B computes a secret key K1 based on B's private key and YE. A computes
                                   a secret key K2 based on A's private key and YE. E computes K1 using E's
                                   secret key XE and YB and computers K2 using XE and YA.
                                4. From now on, E is able to relay messages from A to B and from B to A,
                                   appropriately changing their encipherment en route in such a way that nei-
                                   ther A nor B will know that they share their communication with E.
                             It is computationally intensive. As a result, it is vulnerable to a clogging attack,
                                in which an opponent requests a high number of keys. The victim spends con-
                                siderable computing resources doing useless modular exponentiation rather
                                than real work.

Hiva-Network.Com
686 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                  IKE key determination is designed to retain the advantages of Diffie­Hellman,
          while countering its weaknesses.

          FEATURES OF IKE KEY DETERMINATION The IKE key determination algorithm is
          characterized by five important features:

              1. It employs a mechanism known as cookies to thwart clogging attacks.

              2. It enables the two parties to negotiate a group; this, in essence, specifies the
                  global parameters of the Diffie­Hellman key exchange.

              3. It uses nonces to ensure against replay attacks.

              4. It enables the exchange of Diffie­Hellman public key values.

              5. It authenticates the Diffie­Hellman exchange to thwart man-in-the-middle
                  attacks.

                  We have already discussed Diffie­Hellman. Let us look at the remainder of
          these elements in turn. First, consider the problem of clogging attacks. In this at-
          tack, an opponent forges the source address of a legitimate user and sends a public
          Diffie­Hellman key to the victim. The victim then performs a modular exponentia-
          tion to compute the secret key. Repeated messages of this type can clog the vic-
          tim's system with useless work. The cookie exchange requires that each side send
          a pseudorandom number, the cookie, in the initial message, which the other side
          acknowledges. This acknowledgment must be repeated in the first message of the
          Diffie­Hellman key exchange. If the source address was forged, the opponent gets
          no answer. Thus, an opponent can only force a user to generate acknowledgments
          and not to perform the Diffie­Hellman calculation.

                  IKE mandates that cookie generation satisfy three basic requirements:

              1. The cookie must depend on the specific parties. This prevents an attacker from
                  obtaining a cookie using a real IP address and UDP port and then using it to
                  swamp the victim with requests from randomly chosen IP addresses or ports.

              2. It must not be possible for anyone other than the issuing entity to generate
                  cookies that will be accepted by that entity. This implies that the issuing entity
                  will use local secret information in the generation and subsequent verification
                  of a cookie. It must not be possible to deduce this secret information from any
                  particular cookie. The point of this requirement is that the issuing entity need
                  not save copies of its cookies, which are then more vulnerable to discovery, but
                  can verify an incoming cookie acknowledgment when it needs to.

              3. The cookie generation and verification methods must be fast to thwart attacks
                  intended to sabotage processor resources.

                  The recommended method for creating the cookie is to perform a fast hash
          (e.g., MD5) over the IP Source and Destination addresses, the UDP Source and
          Destination ports, and a locally generated secret value.

                  IKE key determination supports the use of different groups for the Diffie­
          Hellman key exchange. Each group includes the definition of the two global pa-
          rameters and the identity of the algorithm. The current specification includes the
          following groups.
                                              20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 687

    Modular exponentiation with a 768-bit modulus

                      q = 2768 - 2704 - 1 + 264 * ( :2638 * p ; + 149686)
                                                      a=2

    Modular exponentiation with a 1024-bit modulus

                     q = 21024 - 2960 - 1 + 264 * ( :2894 * p ; + 129093)
                                                      a=2

    Modular exponentiation with a 1536-bit modulus
        Parameters to be determined

    Elliptic curve group over 2155
        Generator (hexadecimal): X = 7B, Y = 1C8
        Elliptic curve parameters (hexadecimal): A = 0, Y = 7338F

    Elliptic curve group over 2185

        Generator (hexadecimal): X = 18, Y = D
        Elliptic curve parameters (hexadecimal): A = 0, Y = 1EE9

       The first three groups are the classic Diffie­Hellman algorithm using modular
exponentiation. The last two groups use the elliptic curve analog to Diffie­Hellman,
which was described in Chapter 10.

       IKE key determination employs nonces to ensure against replay attacks. Each
nonce is a locally generated pseudorandom number. Nonces appear in responses
and are encrypted during certain portions of the exchange to secure their use.

       Three different authentication methods can be used with IKE key determination:

    Digital signatures: The exchange is authenticated by signing a mutually ob-
       tainable hash; each party encrypts the hash with its private key. The hash is
       generated over important parameters, such as user IDs and nonces.

    Public-key encryption: The exchange is authenticated by encrypting param-
       eters such as IDs and nonces with the sender's private key.

    Symmetric-key encryption: A key derived by some out-of-band mechanism
       can be used to authenticate the exchange by symmetric encryption of ex-
       change parameters.

IKEV2 EXCHANGES The IKEv2 protocol involves the exchange of messages
in pairs. The first two pairs of exchanges are referred to as the initial exchanges
(Figure 20.11a). In the first exchange, the two peers exchange information concern-
ing cryptographic algorithms and other security parameters they are willing to use
along with nonces and Diffie­Hellman (DH) values. The result of this exchange is to
set up a special SA called the IKE SA (see Figure 20.2). This SA defines parameters
for a secure channel between the peers over which subsequent message exchanges
take place. Thus, all subsequent IKE message exchanges are protected by encryp-
tion and message authentication. In the second exchange, the two parties authenti-
cate one another and set up a first IPsec SA to be placed in the SADB and used for
688 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

Initiator                                                    Responder

                              HDR, SAi1, KEi, Ni

                              HDR, SAr1, KEr, Nr, [CERTREQ]

HDR, SK {IDi, [CERT,] [CERTREQ,] [IDr,] AUTH, SAi2, TSi, TSr}

           HDR, SK {IDr, [CERT,] AUTH, SAr2, TSi, TSr}

                              (a) Initial exchanges

           HDR, SK {[N], SA, Ni, [KEi], [TSi, TSr]}
             HDR, SK {SA, Nr, [KEr], [TSi, TSr]}
              (b) CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange

                              HDR, SK {[N,] [D,] [CP,] ...}
                              HDR, SK {[N,] [D,] [CP], ...}

                              (c) Informational exchange

 HDR = IKE header                                SK {...} = MAC and encrypt
 SAx1 = offered and chosen algorithms, DH group  AUTH = Authentication
 KEx = Diffie­Hellman public key                 SAx2 = algorithms, parameters for IPsec SA
 Nx= nonces                                      TSx = traffic selectors for IPsec SA
 CERTREQ = Certificate request                   N = Notify
 IDx = identity                                  D = Delete
 CERT = certificate                              CP = Configuration

Figure 20.11 IKEv2 Exchanges

protecting ordinary (i.e. non-IKE) communications between the peers. Thus, four
messages are needed to establish the first SA for general use.

       The CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange can be used to establish further SAs
for protecting traffic. The informational exchange is used to exchange management
information, IKEv2 error messages, and other notifications.

Header and Payload Formats

IKE defines procedures and packet formats to establish, negotiate, modify, and de-
lete security associations. As part of SA establishment, IKE defines payloads for
exchanging key generation and authentication data. These payload formats provide
a consistent framework independent of the specific key exchange protocol, encryp-
tion algorithm, and authentication mechanism.

IKE HEADER FORMAT An IKE message consists of an IKE header followed by one
or more payloads. All of this is carried in a transport protocol. The specification dic-
tates that implementations must support the use of UDP for the transport protocol.
                         20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 689

Bit: 0        8          16                                    24         31

        Initiator's Security Parameter Index (SPI)

        Responder's Security Parameter Index (SPI)

Next Payload  MjVer MnVer Exchange Type                            Flags
                            Message ID
                              Length

                         (a) IKE header

Bit: 0        8          16                                               31

Next Payload C RESERVED      Payload Length

                                   (b) Generic Payload header
Figure 20.12 IKE Formats

       Figure 20.12a shows the header format for an IKE message. It consists of the
following fields.

    Initiator SPI (64 bits): A value chosen by the initiator to identify a unique IKE
       security association (SA).

    Responder SPI (64 bits): A value chosen by the responder to identify a unique
       IKE SA.

    Next Payload (8 bits): Indicates the type of the first payload in the message;
       payloads are discussed in the next subsection.

    Major Version (4 bits): Indicates major version of IKE in use.

    Minor Version (4 bits): Indicates minor version in use.

    Exchange Type (8 bits): Indicates the type of exchange; these are discussed
       later in this section.

    Flags (8 bits): Indicates specific options set for this IKE exchange. Three bits
       are defined so far. The initiator bit indicates whether this packet is sent by
       the SA initiator. The version bit indicates whether the transmitter is capable
       of using a higher major version number than the one currently indicated. The
       response bit indicates whether this is a response to a message containing the
       same message ID.

    Message ID (32 bits): Used to control retransmission of lost packets and
       matching of requests and responses.

    Length (32 bits): Length of total message (header plus all payloads) in octets.

IKE PAYLOAD TYPES All IKE payloads begin with the same generic payload header
shown in Figure 20.12b. The Next Payload field has a value of 0 if this is the last
690 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

          payload in the message; otherwise its value is the type of the next payload. The
          Payload Length field indicates the length in octets of this payload, including the
          generic payload header.

                  The critical bit is 0 if the sender wants the recipient to skip this payload if it
          does not understand the payload type code in the Next Payload field of the previous
          payload. It is set to 1 if the sender wants the recipient to reject this entire message if
          it does not understand the payload type.

                  Table 20.3 summarizes the payload types defined for IKE and lists the fields,
          or parameters, that are part of each payload. The SA payload is used to begin the
          establishment of an SA. The payload has a complex, hierarchical structure. The
          payload may contain multiple proposals. Each proposal may contain multiple pro-
          tocols. Each protocol may contain multiple transforms. And each transform may
          contain multiple attributes. These elements are formatted as substructures within
          the payload as follows.

              Proposal: This substructure includes a proposal number, a protocol ID (AH,
                  ESP, or IKE), an indicator of the number of transforms, and then a transform
                  substructure. If more than one protocol is to be included in a proposal, then
                  there is a subsequent proposal substructure with the same proposal number.

              Transform: Different protocols support different transform types. The trans-
                  forms are used primarily to define cryptographic algorithms to be used with a
                  particular protocol.

              Attribute: Each transform may include attributes that modify or complete the
                  specification of the transform. An example is key length.

Table 20.3 IKE Payload Types

            Type                                            Parameters
Security Association       Proposals
Key Exchange               DH Group #, Key Exchange Data
Identification             ID Type, ID Data
Certificate                Cert Encoding, Certificate Data
Certificate Request        Cert Encoding, Certification Authority
Authentication             Auth Method, Authentication Data
Nonce                      Nonce Data
Notify                     Protocol-ID, SPI Size, Notify Message Type, SPI, Notification Data
Delete                     Protocol-ID, SPI Size, # of SPIs, SPI (one or more)
Vendor ID                  Vendor ID
Traffic Selector           Number of TSs, Traffic Selectors
Encrypted                  IV, Encrypted IKE payloads, Padding, Pad Length, ICV
Configuration              CFG Type, Configuration Attributes
Extensible Authentication  EAP Message
Protocol
                                              20.5 / INTERNET KEY EXCHANGE 691

       The Key Exchange payload can be used for a variety of key exchange tech-
niques, including Oakley, Diffie­Hellman, and the RSA-based key exchange used
by PGP. The Key Exchange data field contains the data required to generate a ses-
sion key and is dependent on the key exchange algorithm used.

       The Identification payload is used to determine the identity of communicating
peers and may be used for determining authenticity of information. Typically the
ID Data field will contain an IPv4 or IPv6 address.

       The Certificate payload transfers a public-key certificate. The Certificate
Encoding field indicates the type of certificate or certificate-related information,
which may include the following:

    PKCS #7 wrapped X.509 certificate

    PGP certificate

    DNS signed key

    X.509 certificate--signature

    X.509 certificate--key exchange

    Kerberos tokens

    Certificate Revocation List (CRL)

    Authority Revocation List (ARL)

    SPKI certificate

       At any point in an IKE exchange, the sender may include a Certificate Request
payload to request the certificate of the other communicating entity. The payload
may list more than one certificate type that is acceptable and more than one certifi-
cate authority that is acceptable.

       The Authentication payload contains data used for message authentication
purposes. The authentication method types so far defined are RSA digital signa-
ture, shared-key message integrity code, and DSS digital signature.

       The Nonce payload contains random data used to guarantee liveness during
an exchange and to protect against replay attacks.

       The Notify payload contains either error or status information associated with
this SA or this SA negotiation. The following table lists the IKE notify messages.

           Error Messages                Status Messages
Unsupported Critical       Initial Contact
Payload                    Set Window Size
Invalid IKE SPI            Additional TS Possible
Invalid Major Version      IPCOMP Supported
Invalid Syntax             NAT Detection Source IP
Invalid Payload Type       NAT Detection Destination IP
Invalid Message ID         Cookie
Invalid SPI                Use Transport Mode
692 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY                                     Status Messages
                                                   HTTP Cert Lookup Supported
                                   Error Messages  Rekey SA
                        No Proposal Chosen         ESP TFC Padding Not Supported
                        Invalid KE Payload         Non First Fragments Also
                        Authentication Failed
                        Single Pair Required
                        No Additional SAS
                        Internal Address Failure
                        Failed CP Required
                        TS Unacceptable
                        Invalid Selectors

       The Delete payload indicates one or more SAs that the sender has deleted
from its database and that therefore are no longer valid.

       The Vendor ID payload contains a vendor-defined constant. The constant is
used by vendors to identify and recognize remote instances of their implementa-
tions. This mechanism allows a vendor to experiment with new features while main-
taining backward compatibility.

       The Traffic Selector payload allows peers to identify packet flows for process-
ing by IPsec services.

       The Encrypted payload contains other payloads in encrypted form. The en-
crypted payload format is similar to that of ESP. It may include an IV if the encryp-
tion algorithm requires it and an ICV if authentication is selected.

       The Configuration payload is used to exchange configuration information be-
tween IKE peers.

       The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) payload allows IKE SAs to
be authenticated using EAP, which was discussed in Chapter 16.

20.6 CRYPTOGRAPHIC SUITES

        The IPsecv3 and IKEv3 protocols rely on a variety of types of cryptographic algo-
        rithms. As we have seen in this book, there are many cryptographic algorithms of
        each type, each with a variety of parameters, such as key size. To promote interop-
        erability, two RFCs define recommended suites of cryptographic algorithms and
        parameters for various applications.

               RFC 4308 defines two cryptographic suites for establishing virtual private net-
        works. Suite VPN-A matches the commonly used corporate VPN security used in
        older IKEv1 implementations at the time of the issuance of IKEv2 in 2005. Suite
        VPN-B provides stronger security and is recommended for new VPNs that imple-
        ment IPsecv3 and IKEv2.

               Table 20.4a lists the algorithms and parameters for the two suites. There are
        several points to note about these two suites. Note that for symmetric cryptography,
                                                    20.6 / CRYPTOGRAPHIC SUITES 693

Table 20.4 Cryptographic Suites for IPsec

                                 VPN-A                          VPN-B

ESP encryption         3DES-CBC                      AES-CBC (128-bit key)
ESP integrity
IKE encryption         HMAC-SHA1-96                  AES-XCBC-MAC-96
IKE PRF
IKE Integrity          3DES-CBC                      AES-CBC (128-bit key)
IKE DH group
                       HMAC-SHA1                     AES-XCBC-PRF-128

                       HMAC-SHA1-96                  AES-XCBC-MAC-96

                       1024-bit MODP                 2048-bit MODP

                       (a) Virtual private networks (RFC 4308)

                 GCM-128                   GCM-256           GMAC-128          GMAC-256
                                                                            Null
ESP encryption/  AES-GCM         AES-GCM             Null
Integrity                                                                   AES-GMAC
ESP integrity    (128-bit key)   (256-bit key)                              (256-bit key)
                                                                            AES-CBC
IKE encryption   Null            Null                AES-GMAC               (256-bit key)
                                                     (128-bit key)          HMAC-SHA-384
IKE PRF                                                                     HMAC-SHA-
IKE Integrity    AES-CBC         AES-CBC             AES-CBC                384-192
                 (128-bit key)   (256-bit key)       (128-bit key)          384-bit random
IKE DH group                                                                ECP
                 HMAC-SHA-256 HMAC-SHA-384           HMAC-SHA-256

                 HMAC-SHA-       HMAC-SHA-           HMAC-SHA-
                 256-128         384-192             256-128

                 256-bit random  384-bit random ECP  256-bit random
                 ECP                                 ECP

                                 (b) NSA Suite B (RFC 6379)

VPN-A relies on 3DES and HMAC, while VPN-B relies exclusively on AES. Three
types of secret-key algorithms are used:

    Encryption: For encryption, the cipher block chaining (CBC) mode is used.

    Message authentication: For message authentication, VPN-A relies on HMAC
       with SHA-1 with the output truncated to 96 bits. VPN-B relies on a variant of
       CMAC with the output truncated to 96 bits.

    Pseudorandom function: IKEv2 generates pseudorandom bits by repeated use
       of the MAC used for message authentication.

       RFC 6379 defines four optional cryptographic suites that are compatible with
the United States National Security Agency's Suite B specifications. In 2005, the
NSA issued Suite B, which defined the algorithms and strengths needed to pro-
tect both sensitive but unclassified (SBU) and classified information for use in
its Cryptographic Modernization program [LATT09]. The four suites defined in
RFC 6379 provide choices for ESP and IKE. The four suites are differentiated by
the choice of cryptographic algorithm strengths and a choice of whether ESP is to
provide both confidentiality and integrity or integrity only. All of the suites offer
greater protection than the two VPN suites defined in RFC 4308.
694 CHAPTER 20 / IP SECURITY

                  Table 20.4b lists the algorithms and parameters for the two suites. As with
          RFC 4308, three categories of secret key algorithms are listed:

              Encryption: For ESP, authenticated encryption is provided using the GCM
                  mode with either 128-bit or 256-bit AES keys. For IKE encryption, CBC is
                  used, as it was for the VPN suites.

              Message authentication: For ESP, if only authentication is required, then
                  GMAC is used. As discussed in Chapter 12, GMAC is simply the authenti-
                  cation portion of GMC. For IKE, message authentication is provided using
                  HMAC with one of the SHA-3 hash functions.

              Pseudorandom function: As with the VPN suites, IKEv2 in these suites gen-
                  erates pseudorandom bits by repeated use of the MAC used for message
                  authentication.

                  For the Diffie­Hellman algorithm, the use of elliptic curve groups modulo
          a prime is specified. For authentication, elliptic curve digital signatures are listed.
          The original IKEv2 documents used RSA-based digital signatures. Equivalent or
          greater strength can be achieved using ECC with fewer key bits.

  20.7 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS

Key Terms

anti-replay service         Internet Security Association  Oakley key determination
Authentication Header (AH)      and Key Management             protocol
Encapsulating Security          Protocol (ISAKMP)
                                                           replay attack
    Payload (ESP)           IP Security (IPsec)            security association (SA)
Internet Key Exchange       IPv4                           transport mode
                            IPv6                           tunnel mode
    (IKE)

Review Questions

 20.1 List and briefly describe some benefits of IPsec.
 20.2 List and briefly define different categories of IPsec documents.
 20.3 What parameters identify an SA and what parameters characterize the nature of a

          particular SA?
 20.4 What is the difference between transport mode and tunnel mode?
 20.5 What are the types of secret key algorithm used in IPsec?
 20.6 Why does ESP include a padding field?
 20.7 What are the basic approaches to bundling SAs?
 20.8 What are the roles of the Oakley key determination protocol and ISAKMP in IPsec?

Hiva-Network.Com
          20.7 / KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 695

Problems

 20.1  Describe and explain each of the entries in Table 20.2.
 20.2
 20.3  Draw a figure similar to Figure 20.8 for AH.
 20.4
       List the major security services provided by AH and ESP, respectively.
 20.5
       In discussing AH processing, it was mentioned that not all of the fields in an IP header
 20.6  are included in MAC calculation.
 20.7  a. For each of the fields in the IPv4 header, indicate whether the field is immutable,

 20.8      mutable but predictable, or mutable (zeroed prior to ICV calculation).
 20.9  b. Do the same for the IPv6 header.
20.10  c. Do the same for the IPv6 extension headers.

       In each case, justify your decision for each field.

       Suppose that the current replay window spans from 120 to 530.
       a. If the next incoming authenticated packet has sequence number 340, what will the

           receiver do with the packet, and what will be the parameters of the window after
           that?
       b. If instead the next incoming authenticated packet has sequence number 598, what
           will the receiver do with the packet, and what will be the parameters of the win-
           dow after that?
       c. If instead the next incoming authenticated packet has sequence number 110, what
           will the receiver do with the packet, and what will be the parameters of the win-
           dow after that?

       When tunnel mode is used, a new outer IP header is constructed. For both IPv4
       and IPv6, indicate the relationship of each outer IP header field and each extension
       header in the outer packet to the corresponding field or extension header of the inner
       IP packet. That is, indicate which outer values are derived from inner values and
       which are constructed independently of the inner values.

       End-to-end authentication and encryption are desired between two hosts. Draw
       figures similar to Figure 20.8 that show each of the following.
       a. Transport adjacency with encryption applied before authentication.
       b. A transport SA bundled inside a tunnel SA with encryption applied before

           authentication.
       c. A transport SA bundled inside a tunnel SA with authentication applied before

           encryption.

       The IPsec architecture document states that when two transport mode SAs are
       bundled to allow both AH and ESP protocols on the same end-to-end flow, only
       one ordering of security protocols seems appropriate: performing the ESP protocol
       before performing the AH protocol. Why is this approach recommended rather than
       authentication before encryption?

       For the IKE key exchange, indicate which parameters in each message go in which
       ISAKMP payload types.

       Where does IPsec reside in a protocol stack?
